---
consensus_grade_level: 14.5
headings_per_sentence: 0.19
lists_per_sentence: 0.35
smao_sentences_pct: 0.3
vague_words_per_sentence: 0.19
anaphora_per_sentence: 0.28
sentence_cv: 0.869
cpre_terms_per_sentence: 0.47
---
DRAFT

SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION (SRS)

FOR THE

DEFENSE INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (DII)

COMMON OPERATING ENVIRONMENT (COE)

XML SERVICES (XS)

 

 

 

11 JUNE 1999

Version 2.0

 

 

 

Prepared by

DII COE AOG Data Access Services Technical Working Group (DATATWG)

Semi-Structured Data and Metadata Sub-panel (SSD-MD)

Jim Pipher & Jim Schoening, Co-Chairs

 

 

 

Prepared For

Defense Information System Agency (DISA)

 

**DRAFT**

**TABLE OF CONTENTS**

** **

** **

** **

** **

**[]{#_Toc336235425}[SCOPE]{#_Toc444423236}**

1.  **[]{#_Toc336235426}[IDENTIFICATION OF FUNCTIONAL
    AREA]{#_Toc444423237}**
2.  []{#_Toc336235427}[**FUNCTIONAL AREA OVERVIEW**]{#_Toc444423238}
3.  []{#_Toc336235428}[**DOCUMENT OVERVIEW**]{#_Toc444423241}

This document outlines the software capabilities required for the XS
components for the DII COE. Section 2 lists the documents that are
applicable to this specification. Section 3 provides a list of
functional capabilities. Section 4 identifies the qualification
requirements. Section 5 outlines the requirements and verification
traceability matrix. Section 6 contains the applicable notes associated
with the XS component.

[]{#_Toc336235429}[**APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS**]{#_Toc444423242}

1.  **[]{#_Toc336235430}[GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS]{#_Toc444423243}**
2.  []{#_Toc336235431}[**NON-GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS**]{#_Toc444423244}

Petrucci, Steve, \"Cross-Platform Power Tools, Application Developers
for the Macintosh, Windows, and Windows NT\", Random House Electronic
Publishing, 1993.

Donald Lewine,\"POSIX Programmer\'s Guide\", O\'Reilly & Associates,
Inc. 1991.

W3C Working Draft \"Namespaces in XML\"

**[]{#_Toc336235432}[REQUIREMENTS]{#_Toc444423245}**

**[]{#_Toc336235433}[REQUIRED STATES AND MODES]{#_Toc444423246}**

 

1.  Environmental Mode: This is the real-time operations that must react
    to varying degrees of readiness to full scale wartime operations
    such as crisis planning with the use of heterogeneous data types and
    sources, transfer capabilities, data management services.
2.  COE Compliance. XML Services shall be segmented. COE sponsors shall
    adhere to compliance level requirements described in the I&RTS.
3.  In the fixed (static) mode of operation (base or data processing
    megacenter), the data management services shall have the capability
    of being tuned by on-site personnel to adjust for varying workloads
    and sizes of associated databases. These workloads and databases are
    expected to change more frequently and to a greater extent than for
    processing associated with deployed units
4.  In a changing (dynamic) environment, such as with deployed units,
    the workload and database sizes may be more predetermined (given a
    more precise mission) and require access to fewer data management
    administrative capabilities than needed in a fixed environment. The
    XS shall have the ability to redefine or reset names of connect
    descriptors to database server instances. Connect descriptors are
    fully qualified object names and include address
    (protocol/host/port) and instance name.
5.  In a degraded communications environment, there is a need, for
    example, to be able to reset session time-out values if the data
    management services are being accessed by users affected by the
    communications degradation. At a minimum, the session time-out
    values shall be user definable and be able to be reset prior to
    initialization of a user session. The goal is to provide the option
    of dynamically changing session time values based on current
    communications performance identified by capabilities of the network
    management or DBMS.
6.  End User Mode: Portion of XS services shall be used by various
    classes of users: data consumers, data and database managers,
    network information infrastructure resource managers. Some of these
    uses of the data management services will entail unique requirements
    that shall be fulfilled within the capability of XS services.
7.  Maintenance Mode: This mode includes modification and/or addition of
    application data segments, user permission, privileges, and
    restructuring storage and memory areas. In addition, maintenance
    also shall pertain to shutdown, open not-mounted and online/off-line
    implementations, modifications, upgrade, or other related actions.
    The data management services shall support managing various types of
    data, database architectures and platforms that includes hardware
    and software at the specified sites.
8.  Training Mode. In support of [training activities]{.ul}, the data
    management services shall provide for the same processing as would
    be encountered in a production environment. However, access to the
    database may be via a training application access to the DBMS rather
    than from the production mission application.

 

[]{#_Toc336235434}[**XML SERVICES CAPABILITY
REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423249}

The XS shall deliver inter-related components as shown in figure 3.2-1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3.2-1

[]{#_Toc336235435}[]{#_Toc444423250}

**Register Terms and Structures (e.g., tags, DTDs, DCDs)**

**Producer services**. A producer is an agent that contributes metadata
for inclusion into an XML Registry for the purposes of ensuring maximum
semantic understanding of a term as it appears in an XML document. To
contribute metadata to a registry, the producer must be able to receive
XML registry forms, submit metadata and the related information resource
artifacts, and notify.

** **

1.  Produce and display submittal forms as part of the Information
    Resource Submittal Package from the web containing the following
    Information Resource artifacts: XML Tag Specification, XML Spec
    (i.e. DTD, DCD etc.), Sample of XML document of the tag to be
    submitted. The Package is to be compressed and emailed or sent ftp
    to an addressee.
2.  Download Information Resource Submittal Package from the web
    containing forms, instructions, and tools for submission to XML
    Registry.
3.  Submit prescribed metadata related to information resource type,
    information resource association, status code, data types specified
    and other related information specified in *Appendix A* within a
    combination of forms. These forms are part of the Information
    Resource Submittal Package containing the following Information
    Resource artifacts: XML Tag Specification, XML Spec (i.e. DTD, DCD
    etc.), Sample of XML document of the tag to be submitted. The
    Package is to be compressed and emailed or sent ftp to an addressee.
4.  
5.  Submit metadata by an on-line interactive process
6.  Submit metadata by a off-line and interactive batch process
7.  Parse submitted XML Registry specification forms
8.  Populate XML Registry database
9.  Modify of specified terms & definitions of metadata and status of
    Information Resources.
10. Associate Information Resources specified in *Appendix A.*
11. Annotate rejected?
12. Assemble registered information resources to form new components.
13. Assemble new DTDs from current
14. Produce DTD as an instantiation (others are database schema, message
    definition) for modeling environment.
15. Notify change in Information Resources or authorized producer of
    tag.
16. Provide a capability to post planned changes to a registry
17. Approve and reject submissions
18. Forward request to different registry

**Consumer services**. A consumer examines a registry to select a tag
structure for reuse in one or more applications that will exchange data
according to a pre-defined agreement.

Discovery

View the XML Tags with the following relationships:

1.  Ancestor/ Descendant relationship: Provide the capability to view a
    Tag's origin
2.  Uses/Used by relationship: Provide the capability to view a complex
    Container Tag's parent/child relationship
3.  Data type information: Provide the capability to view a tag's data
    type and related information.
4.  Versioning relationship: Provide the capability to view an
    Information resource's versions
5.  Reference Sets: Provide the capability to view text related to the
    domain values or the related reference set
6.  Amplifying information: Provide the capability to view other
    information resources such as ERwin models, DTDs, documents, etc.,
    which describe or otherwise provide amplifying information.
7.  View the XML Tags via a tree/hierarchy structure or tabular format.
8.  View the XML Tags by giving the user multiple search options to find
    a specific Tag.
9.  View the XML tags by giving the user the search option to find all
    tags of a given subscriber/author.

Each Information Resource will have its own web page to allow the user
to view all pertinent information, according to its information resource
type.

View the Information Resource Submittal Package containing the following
Information Resource artifacts: XML Tag Specification, XML Spec (i.e.
DTD, DCD etc.), Sample of XML document of the tag to be submitted.

 

Display an XML Tag Specification form to the author of a given
information resource. This XML Tag Spec will be used for inputting the
requesting information for a specific Information Resource.

 

Provide capabilities to download the XML Tags or other selected
Information Resources.

 

Catalog entities and attributes within servers to enable browsing,
searching, retrieving of data related to XML sources.

Process ANSI standard SQL as specified in FIPS PUB 127-2

 

Establish rules to ensure maximum semantic understanding of a term as it
appears in an XML document

 

Links to DTDs, DCDs,

Namespace

Provide a capability to subscribe for notification of changes to
Communities of Interest (COE) or Information Resources.

**Manager services**

1.  create and manage usernames, superusers
2.  Establish acceptable naming convention not to be in conflict with
    the DOD data standards convention and establish a relationship to
    other naming conventions.
3.  Create a naming structure within the COE architecture to express the
    context and relationship of the naming convention to other naming
    conventions specified in the I&RTS.
4.  Define a set of metadata tags, information attributed to metadata
    tags (meta-metadata) and other related terms for the maintenance and
    control of XML tags.
5.  Review/approve submission
6.  Monitor changes to data models recorded in Registry

pass request off to ... (per explicit federation agreements)

 

**Design the schema for an XML document**

Structure services

Record structure

Check against standard (e.g., style guide wizard for tags)

1.  Validate
2.  Use and reference existing tags and associated semantic structures

Content services

Use & reference existing tags & associated semantic structures
(extracted from Registry)

1.  create new tags & associated semantic structures
2.  interchange w/other design tools & environments
3.  Record semantic structure in JTA-compliant formalism
4.  Generate standard views
5.  Version metadata objects

 

**Generate xml & schema documents**

Generate a document that includes (by ref or by value) a schema

Develop scheme to permit dynamic cross-referencing and indexing of XML
objects.

 

Generate language (natural language) and charset values

Check conformance

1.  Well-formed
2.  Validate
3.  Extract views of data

Disassemble document to materialize different query results into
different tree structure

Render

Interrogate document

Transmit sufficient metadata to construct alternate, semantically-valid
views (e.g., XSL)

Express version

 

 

**Consume xml & schema documents**

Parsers (dom, sax)

Check conformance

1.  Well-formed
2.  Validate
3.  Create validation constraints shall enable a meaningful sharing of
    XML-based schemas and related information.
4.  Extract semantically-valid views from an XML document (e.g., XSL)
5.  Disassemble hierarchical view to relational representation
6.  Render

 

[]{#_Toc336235438}[**REGISTRY SERVICES EXTERNAL INTERFACE
REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423254}

The Registry shall provide standard APIs as specified in *Appendix B*.

 

[]{#_Toc336235442}[**DATA ACCESS SERVICES INTERNAL INTERFACE
REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423255}

The XS function shall provide standard APIs as specified in *Appendix
C*.

 

[]{#_Toc336235446}[**DATA ACCESS SERVICES INTERNAL DATA
REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423256}

1.  **[]{#_Toc337008254}[]{#_Toc337959828}[]{#_Toc444402524}[]{#_Toc444402691}[]{#_Toc444423257}**[The
    XS shall internally interface (transparent to the operator) with the
    existing data elements of the DBIF, DAC, and COTS RDBMS
    products.]{#_Toc444423257}

[]{#_Toc336235459}[**REGISTRY SERVICES ENVIRONMENT
REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423258}

1.  **[]{#_Toc337008262}[]{#_Toc337959836}[]{#_Toc444402526}[]{#_Toc444402693}[]{#_Toc444423259}**[The
    Registry software shall be portable and required to execute on
    COE-compliant platforms.]{#_Toc444423259}

[]{#_Toc336235463}[**PERSONNEL-RELATED REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423260}

Not applicable. Personnel requirements shall be determined by the
developers of the system in which the XS module is embedded.

 

[]{#_Toc336235464}[**TRAINING-RELATED REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423261}

Not applicable. Training requirements shall be determined by the
developers of the system in which the XS module is embedded.

 

[]{#_Toc336235465}[**LOGISTICS-RELATED REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423262}

The XS developer is responsible for software maintenance, software
support, and software updates. The DISA Configuration Manager (CM) is
responsible for distribution of the XS product to system developers.

[]{#_Toc336235466}[**OTHER REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423263}

None.

 

[]{#_Toc336235467}[**PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423264}

The XS software shall be delivered in accordance with DII COE
guidelines.

 

[]{#_Toc336235468}

[]{#_Toc336235468}

[**PRECEDENCE AND CRITICALITY OF REQUIREMENTS**]{#_Toc444423265}

The following table depicts the mapping of the requirements in Section 3
to their corresponding precedence and criticality code and to other
related requirements within the XS SRS. The precedence and criticality
codes are the following:

-   1 for Essential (E)
-   2 for Desirable (D)
-   3 for Optional (O).

 

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| **Requirement/  | **Requirement   | **Prec**        | **Related       |
| Paragraph       | Description**   |                 | Requirement**   |
| Number**        |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | **Within XS     |
|                 |                 |                 | SRS**           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | TBD             |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

 

[]{#_Toc336235469}

[]{#_Toc336235469}

[**QUALIFICATION PROVISIONS**]{#_Toc444423266}

COE Software will be qualified through formal validation tests of the
SRS level requirements. The Qualification Methods applied to the
software shall include test, demonstration, analysis, and inspection (T,
D, A, I).

 

1.  []{#_Toc336235470}[**TEST**]{#_Toc444423267}
2.  []{#_Toc336235471}[**DEMONSTRATION**]{#_Toc444423268}
3.  []{#_Toc336235472}[**ANALYSIS**]{#_Toc444423269}
4.  []{#_Toc336235473}[**INSPECTION**]{#_Toc444423270}

A qualification method that is carried out by visual examination,
physical manipulation, or measurement to verify that the requirements
have been satisfied.

 

[]{#_Toc336235474}

[]{#_Toc336235474}

[**REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY**]{#_Toc444423271}

Provided under separate document.

 

[]{#_Toc336235475}

[]{#_Toc336235475}

[**NOTES**]{#_Toc444423272}

1.  **[ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS]{#_Toc444423273}**
2.  [**GLOSSARY OF TERMS**]{#_Toc444423274}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

[Automatically: Indicates processing initiated during execution of other
processes, but dependent on information and/or parameters to be
generated or supplied to these other processes. The information /
parameters may be data dependent, or application dependent, or dependent
on a manual process/human intervention. It will include controls
qualifying the processing involved.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Business Rule: A narrative description of policies, procedures, or
principles within an organization. Business rules can be divided in to
four categories: definitions, facts, constraints, and
derivations.]{#_Toc336235476}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

[Definitions are business rules that define entities and
attributes.]{#_Toc336235476}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

[Facts are either links (relationships) between entities or
associations]{#_Toc336235476}

[between an entity and attributes]{#_Toc336235476}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

[Constraints are conditions about the data that must always be true.
They are the integrity rules that protect the data in the eventual
database.]{#_Toc336235476}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

[Derivations are business rules that materialize a new piece of
information (often attribute values) from other pieces of information.
For example, a mathematical derivation might specify that you can obtain
a person\'s age by subtracting his or her birth date from the current
date.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Commit/Rollback: An individual transaction is processed (commit) or
discarded (rollback) by the proponent maintainer of the data items
involved.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Discretionary Access Controls (DAC): A means of restricting access to
objects based on the identity of subjects or groups to which they
belong. The controls are discretionary in the sense that a subject with
a certain access permission is capable of passing that permission on to
any other subject.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Dynamically Generated Processing: Indicates processing initiated during
execution of other processes, but dependent upon information and/or
parameters to be generated or supplied to these other processes. The
information/parameters may be data dependent, or application dependent,
or dependent on a manual process/human intervention. It will include
controls qualifying the processing involved.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Location Transparency: occurs when the physical location of data is
transparent to the applications and users of the database system. For
example, a view that joins table data from several databases provides
location transparency because the user of the view does not need to know
where the data originates from.]{#_Toc336235476}

[ ]{#_Toc336235476}

[Mandatory Access Control (MAC): mediates access to an object based on
the clearance level of the subject (user) and the sensitivity label of
the object. (These controls are always enforced above any discretionary
control implemented by users).]{#_Toc336235476}

[Mirrored Databases: Replication and maintenance of a database on a
transaction basis for the purpose of rapid error or failure recovery as
supported by the resident COTS RDBMS own system utilities and operating
system.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Object: A passive entity that contains or receives information. Access
to an object potentially implies access to the information it contains.
Examples of objects are records, blocks, pages, segments, files,
directories, directory trees, and programs, as well as bits, bytes,
words, fields, processors, video displays, keyboards, clocks, printers,
and network nodes.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Proponent Scheme: Describes the sites at which databases are replicated
and also who owns and has update authority with respect to the data at
each site. It refers to proponency at the source and record
level.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks (RAID): A RAID system appears as
one very large, reliable disk to the CPU. The main reason for using RAID
storage is its reliability. RAID has the same advantages as shadowing
and striping at a lower cost. There are several types/levels of RAID
implementations, including: RAID 0 (known as disk striping), RAID 1
(known as disk shadowing), RAID 3 (in which data is distributed in small
increments across all data disks and adds a parity value to a separate
disk for recovery if any disk fails, RAID 4 (in which data is
distributed in large chunks across all data disks and also has a single
parity disk. RAID 4 intended to overcome performance penalties of RAID 3
for small transfers. RAID 5 (in which parity over RAID 3 or RAID 4
implementations), and RAID 6 ( in which two parity disks in addition to
data disks are used in an attempt to further improve performance). In a
RAID 5 implementation, the data is stored as are check sums and other
information about the contents of each disk in the array. If one disk is
lost, the others can use the check sums and other stored information to
recreate the lost data. Storage system vendors may provide additional
enhancements to RAID level implementations to improve performance and
reliability.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Remote Data Access (RDA): is an ISO (9579) application layer
interoperability standard (protocol and formats) to support access by an
application to a (remote) DBMSs over an OSI network. The goal of RDA is
to allow interoperability between applications (clients) and databases
(servers) of different manufacturers so that an application is able to
read and update data in remote databases via well defined standards. RDA
defines a set of client and server standards and a mapping of SQL
commands to these services. RDA also defines an interface to ISO
(transaction processing) two phase commit TP services in the case where
updates to multiple remote databases need to be coordinated. RDA does
not yet define interoperability between server databases (i.e. it is not
yet a standard for distributed database management).]{#_Toc336235476}

[ ]{#_Toc336235476}

[Replication Scheme: Information that precisely identifies DBs, or
partitions of DBs, to be copied and/or distributed, replication
schedules, and master/remote sites that are to receive the
copies.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Spatial DBMS: Geographic information system that organizes and
maintains spatial data (i.e. data with graphical attributes) in terms of
type, scale, location(s), extent, topology and geometry. Supports
queries of spatial data where the selection criteria are defined by
spatial attributes.]{#_Toc336235476}

[SRI: A Standing Request For Information (SRI) is a capability in which
CASS monitors for the occurrence of conditions established by an
application program, and notifies the calling or establishing
application program when the conditions are satisfied. An SRI may be one
of three types: timer-based, data-based, or
message-based.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Subject: An active entity, generally in the form of a person, process,
or device that causes information to flow among objects or changes the
system state. Technically, a process/domain pair.]{#_Toc336235476}

[Transaction Journalling: Individual messages or database transactions
are stored in a journal file, which may be a linear log file or a
circular file.]{#_Toc336235476}

[]{#_Toc336235476}

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

**APPENDIX A**

[]{#REQ}The metadata and procedures are described for the current
Information Resource Submittal Package .

::: {align="center"}
:::

**Metadata and Related Information**\
An XML tag may be described as any object and is easily created by
anyone using a text editor. Although XML is a relatively new technology,
many developers are already using XML in operational COE systems and
have already created tags and specifications, many of which may be
inconsistent with tags used in other systems. So far, the burgeoning
sets of XML tags have created redundancy and irrelevancy, and they lack
validity.

**XML Registry.**\
To ensure interoperability, this registry provides a baseline set of
tags developed through coordination and approval among the Community.
The Registry allows a user to browse, search, and retrieve data that
satisfy your requirements. The Registry has a substring search
capability so that the user may easily find information resources that
meet the criteria. The user may specify whether to search for the term
within the name of the information resource or the definition or both.

**Developer\'s Role**.\
Developers are urged to review the baseline tags, adopt them where
possible, and subscribe to future notifications about the tags. If,
after reviewing the tags in the Registry, you cannot reuse an existing
specification (a.k.a. Document Type Definition (DTD)) or existing tags,
you may submit your proposed tag to a Community of Interest (COI) and
provide amplifying information for all to understand the semantics for
its proper use.

**COE Chief Engineer\'s Role.**\
The COE Chief Engineer will approve a single Point of Contact (POC) for
a COI to manage the tags within that COI. The COE Chief Engineer will
reserve ultimate authority to mediate any unresolved disputes within all
COIs.

**The COE Data Engineering Team\'s Role**.\
Tags and semantics will be analyzed to identify opportunities to
consolidate tags towards a single or a minimal number of
representations. A \"market forces\" model can also guide COE Data
Engineering in identifying the weak candidates from the strong.

**The Community of Interest\'s POC\'s Role**.\
(The information in the following section is current as of 17 May, 1999.
Please consult the Registry for the most authoritative list of
information resources types.) The POC responsibilities will include the
transitioning of information resources from one status to another. Table
1 lists the valid types of information resources. The status levels are
developmental, candidate, approved, rejected, and retired.

 

Table 1 Information Resource Types

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ***Information Resource***        | ****                              |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | ***Description***                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XML_Element                       | tag, either complex or terminal   |
|                                   | node                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XML_Attribute                     | characteristic of an element, may |
|                                   | be constrained by enumeration     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Model                             | a representation using a          |
|                                   | formalism such as IDEF1x or       |
|                                   | Object Modeling                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XML_Spec                          | a DTD or DCD; the schema for an   |
|                                   | XML document                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Domain                            | the valid values for an element   |
|                                   | or attribute; expressed as a      |
|                                   | valid SQL expression or by        |
|                                   | reference to a separately         |
|                                   | available set (e.g., XML doc of   |
|                                   | current CTRY values)              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XML_Namespace                     | the reference for uniqueness      |
|                                   | within the Registry               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Catalog                           | a Registry which conforms to some |
|                                   | explicit rules of engagement      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Document                          | any other amplifying information  |
|                                   | that is available (e.g.,          |
|                                   | readme.txt)                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

 

 

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Table 2 - Information Resource    |                                   |
| Association Types                 |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ***Forward term***                | ****                              |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | ***Reverse term***                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| uses                              | used_by                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| describes                         | described_by                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| is_XML_spec_for                   | defined_by_XML_spec               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| is_newer_version_of               | is_older_version_of               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| is_constrained_by_domain          | is_domain_for                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| belongs_to_namespace              | is_namespace_for                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| elem                              | attribute_may_qualify_element     |
| ent_may_be_qualified_by_attribute |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| is_model_for                      | is_modeled_by                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

 

 

 

Procedures

For Developers may submit and use information resources within the
Registry constitutes guidance in the generation and use of XML as an
authoritative source for approved XML data and metadata components.

-   Review Tags in Registry and decide what additions/modifications to
    submit (if any)
-   Fill out one XML submission document to package multiple Tags
-   Specify relationships among Tags, provide valid values, and add to
    submission package
-   Include amplifying info associated with specific Tag(s)

Zip and attach submission package to e-mail message to:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

**Rules and Convensions.**\
Establishing a new Information Resource. Follow these conventions for
creating new information resources for the Registry

1.  **Use \"XML_Attributes\" sparingly**\
    \
    If the term is well recognized outside its container term, designate
    it as an element. Example: CTRY_CD, CTRY_NM, CTRY_ABBRD_NM,
    CTRY_OFF_NM, CTRY_SCP_NT_TX, and CTRY_PSTL_NM are all
    characteristics (ER-attributes) for the entity CTRY. In the
    relational world, they are columns within the table ctry, attributes
    of the entity ctry in er-modeling, and member attributes in object
    modeling. It would be expected that a submitter would identify them
    as attributes rather than elements. But if they were identified as
    attributes of the element ctry, then the additional baggage (other
    attributes) must be carried, or submitted as separate elements. We
    wish to limit the proliferation of tags, so we strongly urge folks
    to use XML_Attributes sparingly.\

**Include descriptive definitions AND synonyms for the Information
Resource Definition.**\
\
Initially, the Registry will not have keyword, thesaurus, or ontology
support but it will have a substring search for a number of fields,
including definition. Therefore, we urge submitters to include enough
expressive terms so that COE developers would easily find the term they
might consider \"natural\" in the definition and find the desirable tag
for expressing that concept. Example: If the registered tag is ORG_ID,
the description that includes references

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[**APPENDIX**]{#_Toc444423275} **B**

 

1.  [**EXTERNAL PROGRAMMING INTERFACES**]{#_Toc444423276}

 

The External Interfaces for the XS SRS are defined as interfaces to
non-COE components. Detailed information (as specified in paragraph 3.3
of the Data Item Description DI-IPSC-81433) defining these interfaces
will be specified during the design phase of the COE XS architecture. At
this time such detailed information is unavailable.

 

**[APPENDIX]{#_Toc444423277} C**

 

[**INTERNAL PROGRAMMING INTERFACES**]{#_Toc444423278}

 

The Internal Interfaces for the XS SRS are defined as interfaces to COE
components. Detailed information (as specified in paragraph 3.4 of the
Data Item Description DI-IPSC-81433) defining these interfaces will be
specified during the design phase of the COE XS architecture. At this
time such detailed information is unavailable.

The COE components identified to-date are listed below.

 

1.  [**MANAGEMENT SERVICES API**]{#_Toc444423279}

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Network Administration
-   System Administration
-   Security Administration

 

[**DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM SERVICES**]{#_Toc444423280}

1.  **COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES API**

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Communications
-   Network Services

 

1.  **DISTRIBUTION AND OBJECT MANAGEMENT SERVICES**

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Distributed Computing Services
-   Data Interchange Services

 

[**APPLICATION SUPPORT SERVICES**]{#_Toc444423281}

1.  **PRESENTATION SERVICES**

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Executive Manager
-   Multi-Media Support

 

1.  [**COMMON SUPPORT APPLICATIONS**]{#_Toc444423282}

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Office Automation
-   Message Processing
-   Correlation
-   MCG&I
-   Alerts
-   On-line Help

 

1.  [**SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES**]{#_Toc444423283}

It incorporates other interfaces to:

-   Developer's Toolkit

 

 

**[APPENDIX C]{#_Toc444423284}**

 

1.  [**INTERFACES TO COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS**]{#_Toc444423285}

 

The Interfaces to Commercial Products for the XS SRS are identified
below. Detailed information (as specified in paragraph 3.3 of the Data
Item Description DI-IPSC-81433) defining these interfaces will be
specified during the design phase of the COE XS architecture. At this
time such detailed information is unavailable.

The three commercial products or environments identified for the COE are
the following Relational Database engines:

-   Sybase
-   Oracle
-   Informix.

  --- --- --- ---
               
  --- --- --- ---

 

 
