---
consensus_grade_level: 11.3
headings_per_sentence: 0.02
lists_per_sentence: 0.07
smao_sentences_pct: 0.2
vague_words_per_sentence: 0.07
anaphora_per_sentence: 0.28
sentence_cv: 1.203
cpre_terms_per_sentence: 0.56
---
Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

# **Project ZNIX** **Software Requirements Specification**

## **Version 1.0**


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 1


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

# **Revision History**

|Date|Version|Description|Author|
|---|---|---|---|
|2005/02/10|1.0|Initial Draft.|Sameera Perera|



Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 2


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

# **Table of Contents**


1. Introduction 5


1.1 Purpose 5


1.2 Scope 5


1.3 Definitions, Acronyms and Abbreviations 5


1.3.1 ZNIX 5


1.3.2 ZNIX Framework 5


1.3.3 Client Process 6


1.3.4 ZNIX Proxy Mechanism 6


1.3.5 Entity 6


1.3.6 Associate 6


1.4 References 7


1.5 Overview 8


2. Overall Description 9


2.1 Project Perspective 9


2.1.1 Benefits over alternatives 10


2.2 Product Functions 11


2.3 User Characteristics 11


2.4 Constraints 11


2.5 Assumptions and Dependencies 11


3. Specific Requirements 13


3.1 Functionality 13


3.1.1 Centralized store for user information 13


3.1.2 Hierarchical view of the information 15


3.1.3 Archiving of information 15


3.1.4 The public API 15


3.2 Usability 16


3.2.1 Typical training time required 16


3.3 Reliability 16


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 3


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


3.3.1 Mean Time between Failure (MTBF) 16


3.4 Performance 16


3.4.1 Capacity 16


3.4.2 Resource Utilization 16


3.5 Supportability 17


3.5.1 Coding Conventions 17


3.5.2 Compliance to Opens Source Standard Practices 17


3.6 Security 17


3.7 Design Constraints 17


3.8 Online User Documentation and Help System Requirements 17


3.9 Purchased Components 18


3.10 Interfaces 18


3.10.1 User Interfaces 18


3.10.2 Hardware Interfaces 18


3.10.3 Software Interfaces 18


3.10.4 Communications Interfaces 19


3.11 Licensing Requirements 19


3.12 Legal, Copyright and Other Notices 19


3.13 Applicable Standards 19


4. Supporting Information 20

# **Index of Tables and Figures**


Figure 1.3.6-A ........................................................................................................... 9


Table 3.10.3-A......................................................................................................... 18


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 4


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

# **Software Requirements Specification**

## **1. Introduction**


This section introduces the System Requirements Specification (SRS) for Project


ZNIX to its readers.


**1.1** **Purpose**


The purpose of this software requirements specification (SRS) is to establish the


major requirements of the Project ZNIX research and development effort.


Project ZNIX is an attempt to refine traditional information management


systems to provide an object-based, application-independent retrieval and


manipulation framework.


**1.2** **Scope**


The SRS applies to the higher level design of the ZNIX Framework.


**1.3** **Definitions, Acronyms and Abbreviations**


This section provides the definitions of all terms, acronyms, and abbreviations


required to properly interpret the SRS. Note that capitalization styles are used


throughout the document to distinguish ZNIX-specific terms.


_1.3.1_ _ZNIX_


ZNIX is not an acronym. The term was decided upon to suggest the aspirant


notion that a fully ZNIX integrated operating system could be the last (thus the


letter “Z”) major evolution for POSIX system.


_1.3.2_ _ZNIX Framework_


The ZNIX Framework is a collection of system services (daemons) that:


      - Facilitate user interactions with information and,


      - Expose lower level functionality through a public API


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 5


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


Often, the terms Project ZNIX and the ZNIX Framework and Framework Shell


would be used interchangeably at this stage.


_1.3.3_ _Client Process_


A client process is a software application that interacts with the ZNIX


Framework by either utilizing the public API or by directly accessing the


information presented by the Framework. Note that all client application **need**


**not** be “ZNIX-aware” (i.e. knows that the information it accesses are managed


by the Framework). As long as its operation involves an intervention by the


Framework at some point, an application may be considered a ZNIX Client.


_1.3.4_ _ZNIX Proxy Mechanism_


The Proxy Mechanism is the collection of Framework components that enable


“ZNIX-unaware” applications to utilize the Framework capabilities.


_1.3.5_ _Entity_


An Entity is the basic block that builds up ZNIX’s information hierarchy.


Entities are first class citizens of the ZNIX Framework; which simply means


that the Identity of an Entity is unique and non-dependant on any other Entity.


_1.3.6_ _Associate_


An Associate is similar to an Entity, differing in the fact that its Identity is


dependant on at least one Entity. The Framework’s interest in an Associate


depends solely on its relationship(s) to first class citizens. As such, when the


last related Entity breaks the relationship to an Associated (i.e. loses interest in


it), it will be removed from the ZNIX data [1] store as it no longer has any


significance in the context.


1
Note the use of the word “data” when it has been stated that the word “information” is preferred in this context. The thinking behind


this is that, what the framework manages is raw data; it will associate a meaning to this data effectively transforming them into


information.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 6


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


**1.4** **References**


    - _[Zachary, 1994]:_ Inspired by “Information at your finger tips”- Bill Gates, the


vision behind Microsoft’s (abandoned) project Cairo. Quoted from Zachary,


G. Pascal 1994. _Show-Stopper! The Breakneck Race to Create Windows NT_


_and the Next Generation at Microsoft_ . Little, Brown and Company (UK). (Note:


Longhorn, the upcoming successor to Windows XP is said to be a


continuation of Project Cairo).


    - _WWW01_ : Project Haystack website. http://haystack.lcs.mit.edu/


    - _WWW02_ : ZDNet Software Review website.


http://reviews-zdnet.com.com/4514-3513_16-21008729.html?tag=subnav


    - WWW03: Open Source Initiative Website.


http://opensource.org/licenses/lgpl-license.php


    - WWW04: Open Source Initiative Website.


http://opensource.org/licenses/gpl-license.php


    - _WWW05_ : MSDN Website


http://msdn.microsoft.com/winlogo/


    - _WWW06:_ Websites for Unicode Standards


www.unicode.org


ftp.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/pub/doc/ISO/charsets/ISO-10646-UTF

8.html


ftp.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/pub/doc/ISO/charsets/ISO-10646-UTF

16.html


    - Special Notes


The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",


"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in


this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 7


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


The words “He” or “he”, whenever not referring to a nominal individual, MAY


be read as “he or she” throughout this documentation.


**1.5** **Overview**


This specification is organized into the following sections:

  - _Introduction_, which introduces the specification for Project ZNIX to its readers.

  - _Overall Description,_ which provides a brief, high level description of Project ZNIX


including its definition, benefits over alternatives, capabilities etc.

  - _Specific Requirements,_ which describes the software requirements to a level of


detail sufficient to facilitate design and testing processes.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 8


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

## **2. Overall Description**


Project ZNIX envisions a world which leaves behind a one that users manage


information by mastering software applications [Zachary, 1994]. Emphasis in

this approach is on information [2] and its semantics. It seeks to make meaningful


information accessible to users in ways they themselves declare to be logical.


**2.1** **Project Perspective**


Project ZNIX SHOULD distinguish itself form other information management


systems by its superior integration with the operating system. The Framework,


in its operation, SHOULD resemble the schematic diagram displayed in Figure


1.3.6-A.


**Figure 1.3.6-A**


2
In ZNIX terminology the word “Information” is always preferred over the word “data”, as the former implies that there is an


associated “meaning”.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 9


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


_2.1.1_ _Benefits over alternatives_


2.1.1.1 Project Haystack


“Haystack is a tool designed to let every individual manage all of their


information in the way that makes the most sense to them” [WWW01].


Sharing the idea of a centralized store for all types of information with ZNIX,


Project Haystack provides a tool (an extendable browser) for accessing the


managed information. This tool is however, a standalone application with little


support for 3 [rd] party applications. Although, it does provide means for


developers build additional, unless the project is adopted as a global standard


there would be little incentive for the development of (especially commercial)


extensions.


ZNIX includes both an API and a proxy mechanism. The API would enable


developers to build applications that utilize the full potential of the Framework.


The proxy mechanism would enable many established 3 [rd] party applications to


interact with the Framework.


Requirements to run Haystack on an Intel PC include 512 megabytes of RAM


(with 768 megabytes strongly being recommended). ZNIX Framework SHOULD


run comfortably on systems with only 256 megabytes of RAM.


2.1.1.2 Windows Longhorn


Project ZNIX was largely inspired by an ancestor of Microsoft’s Windows


Longhorn. However, since at the time of this specification, features inherent in


this operating system have not been finalized, little conscious effort will be


taken to incorporate them into ZNIX.


It has been reported that “by the time Longhorn ships, according to Microsoft


chairman Bill Gates, PCs will have 4GHz to 6GHz processors, more than 2GB of


memory, at least a terabyte of storage, and graphics accelerators three times


more powerful than those offered by ATI and NVIDIA today” [WWW02]. ZNIX on


the other hand is designed from the ground up to run on system with far less


resources.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 10


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


**2.2** **Product Functions**


    - Provide a centralized archive for user’s information.


    - Provide hierarchical model for managing the archived information.


Hierarchies maybe inheritance based, association based or based on any


other type of relationship conceived by the user.


    - Allow the user to add, remove, modify or back up (to removable storage


devices) arbitrary pieces of information without disrupting the hierarchy.


    - Assist the user in building up his information hierarchy by automating


such tasks as data capturing and categorizing.


    - Provide a simple API for developing ZNIX-aware client applications.


**2.3** **User Characteristics**


The browser GUI SHOULD be designed such that even casual users could easily


manipulate their information with little or no training. It is expected that the


bulk of the ZNIX user-base would be home users, managerial staff, executives,


and researchers who are likely to possess only basic IT skills.


**2.4** **Constraints**


The system design MUST be subjected to the following constraints:


    - Hardware: Intel Pentium III or compatible 1-GHz PC with 256 megabytes of


RAM


**2.5** **Assumptions and Dependencies**


The system design MAY assume that all interfaces designed for the 3 [rd] party


software listed in Table 3.9.3-A will be compatible with their subsequent


releases. Thus, for instance, when the system is found to be compatible to


Windows 2000 Professional Service Pack 4, it MAY be assumed to be Windows


2000 Professional Compliant, regardless whether other service releases would


break the system.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 11


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


The applications listed in this table are assumed to be safe from vulnerabilities.


The security offered by these products will form the basis of the security of the


Framework.


It is assumed that supporting the software listed would be sufficient to serve


the intended user-base, considering their popularity on Microsoft Windows


based systems.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 12


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

## **3. Specific Requirements**


**3.1** **Functionality**


This section describes the functional requirements of the system.


_3.1.1_ _Centralized store for user information_


The Framework MUST be capable of capturing information form the software


tools specified in Table 3.9.3-A. The data captured SHOULD be stored in a


centralized data store. The Framework MAY decide whether the information


should be stored as Entities or Associates.


The data capturing and archiving mechanisms MAY resemble the following.


3.1.1.1 Type of Information: Personnel


Mechanism:


i. The Address Book is used to create Entities under the category “People”


(Category names are user definable. However, a certain set of categories


like People, Email etc. MAY need to always be present).


ii. User SHOULD be able to modify, add, delete or group these Entities by


navigating to a virtual folder (e.g. /People/).


3.1.1.2 Type of Information: Email (Outbound)


Mechanism:


i. The email is intercepted before it is dispatched to the SMTP server.


ii. An Associate is created to contain the message body.


iii. The recipient name(s) are used to create (if required) Entities under the


“People” category. The Associate is then linked to each Entity.


3.1.1.3 Type of Information: Email (Inbound)


Mechanism:


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 13


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


i. The email is fetched from the POP3 server.


ii. An Associate is created to contain the message body.


iii. The sender’s name is used to create Entities, under the category


“People”. The Associate is then linked to this Entity.


3.1.1.4 Type of Information: WWW Documents


Mechanism:


i. User SHOULD be able to specify when he is to start a research project; i.e.


when the web sites he visits subsequently are to be permanently stored.


ii. The project name specified by the user spawns a new Entity in the


Framework.


iii. An associate is created as an archive and is linked to this Entity.


3.1.1.5 Type of Information: Textual Documents


Mechanism


i. The user after editing a document in a word-processor invokes a special


GUI supplied by the Framework.


ii. The GUI allows him to draw arrows to and from (a symbol representing)


the current document to any Entity creating relationships between the


document and the relevant Entities.


iii. The user may optionally specify a descriptive name for the document.


iv. The document is automatically saved to disk in a manner that reflects


the relationships it has to other Entities. The user may in the future


fetch this document by following the relationship paths that he had


created.


The GUI described in section 3.1.1.5 MAY also be made available when dealing


with other types of information as well.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 14


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


_3.1.2_ _Hierarchical view of the information_


The user MUST be able to view the information in the central store in a


hierarchical manner that makes sense to him. Section 3.1.1 describes how this


hierarchy is built up. The Framework SHOULD include a browser that is


capable of displaying this hierarchy in a UI similar to that of the Windows


Explorer. The browser MAY OPTIONALLY be integrated directly in to Windows


Explorer, rather than being a standalone application.


This browser MAY integrate the GUI described in section 3.1.1.5 as well.


_3.1.3_ _Archiving of information_


Often, the user may want to archive portions of the information-store to


removable storage media (the term storage media covers only CD-ROMs and


USB Pen Drives at this point). However, this SHOULD not mean that such


portions would be “forgotten” by the Framework.


Therefore, some residue MUST be left on the data store to indicate that a


portion of data has been archived. For example, assume all information relating


to a “Person” Entity named John is archived to a CD-ROM. When the user


subsequently looks for John, the Framework SHOULD NOT declare that such


an Entity was not found. Rather, it SHOULD inform the user that the Entity


has been archived (and OPTIONALLY, if he wishes to proceed, to remount the


relevant storage device).


_3.1.4_ _The public API_


The Framework API should expose at least the following functionality to client


processes.


      - Create, delete and modify Entities and Entity groups


      - Create, delete and modify relationships between Entities


      - List and access Entities with an API similar to that of a standard file


system API.


      - Execute queries for the retrieval of Entities using different criteria.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 15


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


The API that exposes Entity listings MAY be designed to be similar to the

`System.IO` APIs of the .NET Platform which provide directory and file listings.


**3.2** **Usability**


_3.2.1_ _Typical training time required_


GUIs associated with the Framework SHOULD be designed such that an user


with basic understanding of the Windows 2000/XP operating systems would


instinctively be able to interact with them. Therefore, most GUIs MAY need to


closely mimic popular Windows applications.


**3.3** **Reliability**


This subsection specifies the following requirements associated with the


reliability of the system.


_3.3.1_ _Mean Time between Failure (MTBF)_


The mean time between failures (MTBF) SHALL exceed 3 months.


**3.4** **Performance**


_3.4.1_ _Capacity_


At this stage of the development, the Framework MAY only operate in single


user mode, with no networking capabilities.


_3.4.2_ _Resource Utilization_


The Framework Shell SHOULD NOT utilize more than 40 megabytes of RAM.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 16


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


**3.5** **Supportability**


_3.5.1_ _Coding Conventions_


Any coding conventions to be used during implementation MUST be


documented before the beginning of the phase, and strictly adhered to during


the phase.


_3.5.2_ _Compliance to Opens Source Standard Practices_


Project ZNIX SHOULD be available to its potential users in source and binary


from, and free of charge. The project MAY be hosted on a popular Open Source


distribution website such that the Open Source community is aware of (and


contribute to) its existence.


The website for distributing the project SHALL include provisions for the users


to make comments on the product as well as to compile a wish-list of features.


**3.6** **Security**


The Framework MUST guard against malicious scripts on remote websites from


accessing its information.


The Framework MUST guard against unintended corruption of information by


the user himself.


**3.7** **Design Constraints**


No design constraint has been imposed at this stage.


**3.8** **Online User Documentation and Help System Requirements**


The online help system should be compiled utilizing as much of non-technical


terms as possible. Care SHOULD be taken not to produce an exhaustive user


documentation as that would defeat the main purpose of the system as


expressed in the introduction to section 2.


A comprehensive Developer’s Guide MAY be compiled to facilitate 3 [rd] party


ZNIX-aware applications.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 17


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


**3.9** **Purchased Components**


N/A


**3.10** **Interfaces**


_3.10.1_ _User Interfaces_


A GUI capable of browsing the information managed by the Framework, similar


to that of the Windows Explorer SHOULD be available to the user. The GUI


MUST also be capable of allowing the user to specify relationships between


disparate Entities as he see fit.


_3.10.2_ _Hardware Interfaces_


The system does not require special hardware interfacing.


_3.10.3_ _Software Interfaces_


Provisions SHOULD be made so that at least the following 3 [rd] party applications


can take advantage of the Framework for the specified types of information.

|Product Name|Source|Version|Type of Information|
|---|---|---|---|
|Outlook Express|Microsoft Corporation|6.0|Email|
|Outlook 2003|Microsoft Corporation|11.5|Email|
|Address Book|Microsoft Corporation|6.0|Personnel Information|
|Internet Explorer|Microsoft Corporation|6.0|WWW Documents|
|Opera|Opera Software ASA|7.5|WWW Documents|
|Firefox|Mozilla Corporation|1.0|WWW Documents|
|Word 2003|Microsoft Corporation|11.5|Textual Documents|



**Table 3.10.3-A**


Targeted operating systems are Windows 2000 Professional and Windows XP.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 18


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005


_3.10.4_ _Communications Interfaces_


At this stage of development Project ZNIX requires no communication


interfaces.


**3.11** **Licensing Requirements**


ZNIX Framework will be licensed under GNU Library General Public License


(LGPL) [WWW03].


The browser and any other tool released alongside the Framework will be


licensed under GNU Public License (GPL) [WWW04].


**3.12** **Legal, Copyright and Other Notices**


    - All proprietary trademarks, product names and/or logos used on this


document are trademarks of their respective owners.


**3.13** **Applicable Standards**


All components associated with Project ZNIX should conform to the following


standards:


      - Windows 2000 Logo Requirements [WWW05]


The system SHALL conform to ISO 10646 (Unicode UTF-8) and OPTIONALLY


ISO 10646-1 (Unicode UTF-16) standards for character set encoding. [WWW06]


Additionally, design of the system MAY yield a new set of standards that ZNIX

aware client processes MAY need to conform to.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 19


Project ZNIX Version:      1.0


Software Requirements Specification Document ID: ZNIX-SRS 1.0 Date: April 30, 2005

## **4. Supporting Information**


None specified.


Confidential © Sameera Perera, 2005 Page 20


