---
consensus_grade_level: 11.0
headings_per_sentence: 0.01
lists_per_sentence: 0.0
smao_sentences_pct: 0.0
vague_words_per_sentence: 0.16
anaphora_per_sentence: 0.09
sentence_cv: 1.641
cpre_terms_per_sentence: 0.17
---
# PHIN Preparedness

## **OUTBREAK MANAGEMENT** **FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS**

#### Version 1.0 4/26/2005


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_

### **TABLE OF CONTENTS**


**1** **INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................... 3**


**2** **OUTBREAK MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS................................ 4**

2.1 System Architecture .................................................................................................. 4
2.2 Data Requirements .................................................................................................... 5
2.2.1 Entity Data................................................................................................................. 5
2.2.2 Health Event Data ..................................................................................................... 6
2.2.3 Travel History and Conveyance Data ....................................................................... 6
2.2.4 Case Investigation and Exposure Contact Data ........................................................ 7
2.2.5 Monitoring and Follow-up Data................................................................................ 8
2.2.6 Specimen/Sample Collection and Laboratory Response Data.................................. 9
2.2.7 Prophylaxis and Treatment Data............................................................................. 11
2.2.8 Adverse Event Data................................................................................................. 11
2.2.9 Activity Logging Data............................................................................................. 11
2.3 System Functions and Behaviors ............................................................................ 11
2.3.1 Case Investigation ................................................................................................... 11
2.3.2 Linking .................................................................................................................... 12
2.3.3 Contact Exposure Tracing....................................................................................... 12
2.4 Analysis, Visualization, and Report Generation ..................................................... 13
2.5 System Integration and Data Exchange .................................................................. 14
2.6 Vocabulary Standards ............................................................................................. 15
2.7 Operations ............................................................................................................... 16
2.8 System Security and Availability............................................................................ 16
2.9 Privacy..................................................................................................................... 16


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 2 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_

##### **1 INTRODUCTION**

This document describes the Public Health Information Network (PHIN) functional
requirements for systems implemented to participate in the management of outbreaks and
other health events. Outbreak Management (OM) is the PHIN functional area intended to
support the needs of investigation, monitoring, management, analysis, and reporting of a
health event or act of bioterrorism. OM should aid in the collection and analysis of data to
support identifying and containing the health event. OM systems should be configurable
to meet the needs of different types of health events, and capture data related to cases,
contacts, investigations, exposures, relationships, clinical and environmental
specimens/samples, laboratory results, vaccinations and treatments, travel history, and
conveyance information. The application should also allow for new objects to be defined
and created during the course of an investigation.

Central to the functionality of a system supporting OM is the ability to collect data related
to cases and exposures and to create traceable links between all appropriate entities. By
tracing the mechanism of transmission and identifying the source of the health event, the
appropriate response staff can more effectively contain the event. Systems supporting OM
should also be integrated with the systems supporting early event detection,
countermeasure administration, laboratory, and surveillance to achieve the primary goal of
managing the response to and mitigating the effects of an event.

This document provides minimum operational requirements necessary to support an
outbreak management system and should in no way preclude a system from incorporating
additional functionality beyond what has been covered in this document.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 3 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_

##### **2 OUTBREAK MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS**

The following requirements describe baseline functionality for any system(s) implemented
to support Outbreak Management:

_**2.1 System Architecture**_ **:** Broad system-level needs, such as flexible configuration,
should be addressed by systems supporting OM.
_**2.2 Data Requirements**_ **:** Systems supporting OM need a variety of data to support
investigations, including data regarding demographics, cases, exposures,
investigations, agents, contacts, specimen/sample collection, laboratory tests, travel
and conveyance, and restriction monitoring.
_**2.3 System Functions and Behaviors**_ **:** Systems supporting OM should support case
investigation, maintain detailed and comprehensive linkages, trace contacts, and
quarantine and isolation monitoring activities.
_**2.4 Analysis, Visualization, and Report Generation**_ **:** Systems supporting OM should
enable investigators to produce both aggregated and individual reports about affected
entities and events.
_**2.5 System Integration and Data Exchange**_ **:** OM information must be
exchangeable, based on established standards, between systems involved in the
investigation, identification, confirmation, and reporting of a health event.
_**2.6 Vocabulary Standards:**_ Standard vocabulary lists and data structures have been
defined by standards organizations. Where they exist, systems supporting OM should
use them. As additional standards are defined, they should be accepted and
implemented
_**2.7 Operations**_ **:** Personnel, roles, activities, and responsibilities necessary to support
all aspects of OM should be clearly defined.
_**2.8 System Security and Availability**_ **:** Security of OM data includes the protection of
data from corruption and access by unauthorized individuals, as well as the protection
of the actual systems supporting OM from sabotage or other failure. A plan must be
established for continuing activities when systems supporting OM are unavailable.
_**2.9 Privacy:**_ Patients, organizations, and personnel must be protected from fraudulent
and unauthorized use of their information.


**2.1 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE**

2.1.1 Systems designed to support OM must offer configuration flexibility so that new
data fields, entities, entity types and relationship types may be added to capture
information unique to each particular health event.

2.1.2 Systems supporting OM must support structured data entry for common forms and
fields to ensure data integrity, validity, and standardization. A standardized data
structure ensures that data mapping of common elements will only be necessary one
time, rather than for each event.

2.1.3 Systems supporting OM should support multiple deployment options (e.g., client
server, disconnected, and potentially web based).


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 4 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.1.3.1 Systems supporting OM should provide the ability for computers in
disconnected mode to reconnect to a server to share OM data among other
computers that operate in disconnected mode.

2.1.3.2 OM data should be synchronized so that all instances of OM applications
working from the same server are able to share and use the same data.

2.1.4 Systems supporting OM should be able to electronically record and store data from
remote devices that may be uploaded to an aggregating system.

2.1.5 Systems supporting OM should be capable of using configurable, domain-specific
vocabulary.


**2.2 DATA REQUIREMENTS**

_**The following high-level data requirements are necessary to ensure that the data being**_
_**collected, analyzed, and reported to support OM are clearly defined.**_

2.2.1 **Entity Data**

_**An entity is any being or object involved in a health event. Entities may be classified as**_
_**a person, organization, location, animal, object, conveyance, event, or other organism.**_
_**Each type of entity requires specific data to be collected.**_

2.2.1.1 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture demographic data
about persons involved in an OM investigation, including: Subject ID, name,
address, date of birth, gender, phone number, race, ethnicity, and country of
citizenship.

2.2.1.1.a Other descriptive details may be captured, such as occupation and
work history.

2.2.1.2 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about
organizations (e.g., a local health department, a university, a professional
association) involved in an OM investigation, including: organization name,
location, and contact information.

2.2.1.3 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about
locations involved in an OM investigation, including: name (if applicable),
type (e.g., floor, building, room, store), street address, city, state, zip code,
country, GPS coordinates, and other specific details (e.g., a specific building
on a campus, a business branch location, a local chapter’s meeting hall)

2.2.1.4 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about any
animals involved in an OM investigation, including: type (dog, monkey, etc),
age, gender, owner’s name and address, color, weight, and species. A Subject
ID should also be collected for animals in an OM investigation. It may be a
challenge to ensure unambiguous identification because demographic details
of an animal are not easily identified; therefore, animals involved in
investigations may need to be tagged.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 5 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.1.5 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data for any
object involved in an OM investigation, such as a letter, invoice, food item, or
any object that cannot be classified as a “person, organization, place, or
animal.” Collected data may include: name of the object, type, physical
descriptors, address, identification number (e.g. serial number, package slip
number), and relevant dates and times (e.g., invoice date, shipping date,
packaging date).

2.2.1.6 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about any
conveyance involved in an OM investigation, including: type of conveyance,
route taken (e.g., flight number), etc.

2.2.1.7 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about any
public or private gathering of people (e.g., church social, ball game) involved
in an OM investigation, including: time, location, nature of the event, etc.

2.2.1.8 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture data about any
living things other than persons or animals that are involved in an OM
investigation, including: type of living thing, and other customizable data
collection questions.

2.2.1.9 Systems supporting OM must have the capability to capture an entity’s travel
history to support investigations of entities infected, exposed or potentially
exposed.

2.2.2 **Health Event Data**

2.2.2.1 When a health event is investigated, it must be assigned an event identifier
(i.e., Event ID) that is unique within the jurisdiction.

2.2.2.2 Data describing the health event should be captured, including the reason for
the investigation, the category of event (e.g. environmental, infectious), the
date the event began, the suspected agent (if known) or investigation focus,
the geographic area impacted by the event, as well as the event status (e.g.,
open, closed).

2.2.2.3 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to record the case definition
for a health event.

2.2.2.4 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to capture changes to the case
definition that occur as the health event evolves.

2.2.3 **Travel History and Conveyance Data**

_**Travel history provides specific information to indicate when, where, and how subjects**_
_**involved in an event traveled to a location (or to multiple locations), and conveyance**_
_**data describes the vehicle in which the travel occurred. Examples of travel history**_
_**include a person’s local travel as a part of their daily activities as well as the shipment of**_
_**animals or plants from one country to another.**_


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 6 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.3.1 Travel history data should include information such as the method of
transportation (e.g. bus, plane, boat, car), flight number, departure and arrival
dates and times, and the origination and destination locations (city, state, and
country).

2.2.3.1.a Information about each leg of a trip, as well as the parent information
about the trip, should be captured. For example, if a person who lives
in Georgia travels to Seattle and becomes exposed to monkey pox,
then visits a friend in Santa Fe, travel history and conveyance data
should be noted accordingly for each place the exposed person
traveled.

2.2.3.2 Travel history data to be collected for an animal or object should include
shipping invoices, animal shelter delivery and adoption receipts, and delivery
schedules (including delivery vehicle and driver information).

2.2.3.3 Detailed conveyance data must be collected when relevant to the
investigation, including the carrier identifier, the type of conveyance (such as
airplane, bus, or train, among countless others), as well as the make, model,
year, and identification number (e.g., VIN) of each vehicle with which the
entity was in contact (if this information is relevant to the investigation).

2.2.4 **Case Investigation and Exposure Contact Data**

_**Case and exposure data provide more detailed information beyond demographic data.**_
_**Cases can be persons or animals, and exposure contacts can be persons, animals, other**_
_**organisms, or exposure settings, such as travel conveyance, location, organization,**_
_**object, or event.**_

2.2.4.1 Because attributes of both case and exposure data may describe the same
entity, systems supporting OM must have the ability to avoid capturing
redundant entity demographic information.

2.2.4.2 Public Health Case Data

2.2.4.2.a Case data about the entity should include: a case identifier (i.e., Case
ID) that is unique within the jurisdiction being reported, the suspected
agent, case diagnosis, health status (e.g., no symptoms, acute illness),
case status (e.g., confirmed, probable, suspect), investigation dates,
clinical history, symptom onset date and time, epidemiological links to
other cases, and priority (e.g., high, medium, low).

2.2.4.2.b There must be a means to update the case diagnosis either manually or
automatically if the case definition changes during an event.

2.2.4.2.c Epidemiological (epi) data must be collected to assist in the case
investigation of events. Standard epi data to be collected includes:
onset date and time of symptoms, type of symptoms, risk factors,
medical history data, laboratory data, procedure data, and
questionnaire responses.

2.2.4.2.d Systems supporting OM must allow for dynamic, event-specific case
investigation data to be captured.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 7 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.4.2.e In the context of a case, all entities exposed to a case must be recorded
and linked to the case.

2.2.4.2.f Demographic information should be collected about the investigator,
including their name, address, and contact information, so that the
investigator may be contacted to answer questions or to provide
additional information.

2.2.4.2.g Both the jurisdiction investigating the event and the jurisdiction
reporting the cases and associated investigations must be captured.
For example, if a person becomes ill during travel in one jurisdiction
but is the resident of another, the illness will be reported by the state
(jurisdiction) of residence and investigated by the jurisdiction visited.

2.2.4.2.h Systems supporting OM should have the ability to classify entities
associated with the investigation as investigation controls. For
example, controls share demographic characteristics with the subject
of the case, but are not infected with the agent that is the focus of the
investigation.

2.2.4.3 Exposure Contact Data

2.2.4.3.a Exposure investigation data to be captured must include information
related to exposure levels, type of exposure (e.g., intimate, social,
household, common conveyance), place of exposure, length of time
the entity was exposed, frequency of exposure, and the entity’s
proximity to the source of exposure.

2.2.4.3.b Detailed data must be collected about the source of exposure as well as
the exposed entity to support contact exposure tracing. Exposure data
related to both the potential source and the potential spread include the
entity’s type, Subject ID, Contact ID, contact’s name and address,
exposure dates and times, health status, and priority code.

2.2.4.3.c Epi data must be collected to assist in the exposure investigation of
health events. Standard epi data to be collected for exposure
investigation parallels the data to be collected for case investigation
and includes: onset date and time of symptoms, type of symptoms, risk
factors, laboratory data, procedure data, and questionnaire responses.

2.2.4.3.d Systems supporting OM must support capturing dynamic, eventspecific data that describes contact between two subjects.

2.2.5 **Monitoring and Follow-up Data**

_**Monitoring and follow-up data is used to track the progress and treatment of subjects**_
_**who were exposed or potentially exposed to a health event. For more information about**_
_**monitoring and follow-up data, please reference “PHIN Countermeasure/Response**_
_**Administration**_ _**Functional**_ _**Requirements**_ _**and**_ _**Process**_ _**Flows”,**_ _**available**_ _**at**_
_**[www.cdc.gov/phin.](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_

2.2.5.1 Systems supporting OM should support the monitoring and follow-up
activities required when tracking the status of cases and exposed individuals.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 8 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.5.1.a Monitoring data should be collected about cases and exposed
individuals who are isolated or quarantined because of a health event.

2.2.5.1.b Follow-up data should be collected from subjects or their proxies to
track symptoms and compliance with recommended treatment plans or
prophylaxis.

2.2.5.1.c Follow-up data may be received from take response exams of persons
who received a countermeasure that requires such an exam (i.e.,
smallpox vaccination).

2.2.6 **Specimen/Sample Collection and Laboratory Response Data**

_**Specimen/sample collection and laboratory response data supports the collection of**_
_**clinical specimens, food samples, environmental samples, and other types of samples**_
_**that will be tested for biological, chemical, and radiological agents.**_ _**These**_
_**specimens/samples can be collected from places, persons, animals, or environmental**_
_**sources such as air, water, food, or soil.**_

2.2.6.1 Specimens/samples collected for laboratory testing must be assigned an
identifier (i.e., Specimen ID) that is unique within the jurisdiction.

2.2.6.2 The subject of a specimen/sample collected for laboratory testing must be
linked to the specimen/sample by an identifier (i.e., Subject ID) that is unique
within the jurisdiction.

2.2.6.3 Systems supporting OM must be able to store data about the
specimens/samples that are collected for laboratory testing. Examples of this
data are: Specimen ID, Subject ID, purpose for test, collection date and time,
subject type (e.g., human, plant, animal, food), specimen category, specimen
type, suspected agent, risk indicator (e.g., infectious, radioactive, corrosive),
person performing specimen/sample collection (including contact
information), location of collection, and volume and quantity details.

2.2.6.3.a Clinical specimen data should include information about the specimen
source/site from which the specimen was taken, symptom date of
onset, and whether the sample is acute or convalescent.

2.2.6.3.b Environmental sample data should include information about the
collection method, location (geocoded if possible) from which the
sample was taken, source (e.g., rain or well for water, radiation
release, asbestos, chair or desk in a specified location), nature of the
sample (e.g., soil, water, air), quality control data, collection begin and
end date and time for air samples, and original volume and volume of
concentrate tested for water samples.

2.2.6.3.c Food sample data should include information about the lot number,
batch number, manufacturer name, shipping invoice, temperature,
sample type (e.g., dairy – milk, red meat, spice), and product storage
condition.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 9 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.6.3.d Bar-coding should be supported for the capture of detailed
specimen/sample data to improve the quality and efficiency of data
collection.

2.2.6.4 Chain of custody information for all specimens/samples should be captured.

2.2.6.5 Chain of custody information for forensic and select agent samples must be
captured, including the person who collected the sample, the location of
collection, all people who came into contact with the sample during the
preparation for shipment to the laboratory, and the acceptance of the package
by the shipper.

2.2.6.6 Systems supporting OM must be able to create a laboratory test request for a
specimen/sample or group of specimens/samples. More information about
creating laboratory test requests is found in section _2.5 System Integration and_
_Data Exchange_ of this document.

2.2.6.7 Information about batch shipments of specimens/samples that are transferred
to test laboratories or other facilities must be collected, including the shipper
(e.g., UPS, FedEx), shipment tracking number, and the sending organization’s
contact information.

2.2.6.8 Systems supporting OM should be able to support the inclusion of labeling,
packaging and shipping instructions (e.g., container type, storage condition,
preservative), and the shipping manifest with batch shipments of
specimens/samples.

2.2.6.9 Systems supporting OM must be able to store laboratory result(s) and link the
result(s) to the original laboratory test request. More information about
receiving and linking laboratory test requests is found in section _2.5 System_
_Integration and Data Exchange_ of this document.

2.2.6.10 Systems supporting OM must store data about laboratory results. Examples of
this data include the Specimen ID, Subject ID, test date and time, test type
(LOINC), data for each organization involved in the testing of the
specimen/sample (e.g., testing or reference laboratory name, location, contact
information), laboratory results and result values (SNOMED), other data such
as unit of measure for result value, overall interpretation, and any relevant
notes.

2.2.6.10.a If the specimen/sample collection record exists, the laboratory result
must be linked to the specimen collection record by the Specimen ID.

2.2.6.10.b If the specimen/sample collection record does not exist, the laboratory
result must be linked to the subject by the Subject ID.

2.2.6.10.c All levels of granularity of results (e.g., specimen/sample level, assay
level) must be supported.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 10 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.2.7 **Prophylaxis and Treatment Data**

2.2.7.1 Systems supporting OM should capture or be linked to data regarding the
prophylaxis or treatment to cases, exposed individuals, or at risk persons,
including the person who ordered the prophylaxis or treatment, and the name,
date, type, duration, and dosage of the treatment or prophylaxis given. For
specific data requirements regarding the administration of prophylaxis and
treatment, please reference _PHIN Preparedness Countermeasure/Response_
_Administration Functional Requirements and Process Flows_, available at
_[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin)_ .

2.2.7.2 Contraindication information should be collected to indicate why
vaccinations, treatments, or antidotes may not have been administered or why
the patient may not have complied with prescribed interventions.

2.2.8 **Adverse Event Data**

2.2.8.1 If an affected person suffers a negative reaction to a vaccine or prophylaxis
that was administered, adverse event data may be collected and used to
determine the need for additional interventions or to determine if there is a
problem with the pharmaceutical, batch, or the administering facility or
person. For specific data requirements regarding adverse event data, please
reference _PHIN Preparedness Countermeasure/Response Administration_
_Functional Requirements and Process Flows_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.2.9 **Activity Logging Data**

2.2.9.1 Systems supporting OM should capture information such as the date and time
of an activity, activity type, who initiated the activity, and contact information
to generate activity logs for management purposes.

2.2.9.2 Activity logs, which are tools for investigators to track their actions during a
case, should be supported.  For example, investigators may log calls made to
monitor symptoms or calls made to schedule follow-up visits.

2.2.9.3 Activity logs may also provide information needed to support communication
with various jurisdictions in the event that the investigation crosses
jurisdictional boundaries. For example, if a person becomes ill during travel
in one jurisdiction but is the resident of another, the illness will be reported by
the state (jurisdiction) of residence, rather than by the jurisdiction visited.


**2.3 SYSTEM FUNCTIONS AND BEHAVIORS**

2.3.1 **Case Investigation**

2.3.1.1 Electronic questionnaires must be developed and validated. They will be
designed by investigators to collect common data elements (e.g., patient
demographics, test results, exposure contacts), agent-specific data elements
(e.g., specific laboratory test), and other customized data elements.

2.3.1.1.a Electronic questionnaires should provide the capability to accept
digital signatures.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 11 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.3.1.2 Systems supporting OM must provide the ability to control the configuration
of and revisions to investigation-specific questionnaires.

2.3.1.3 Systems supporting OM must provide the ability to publish investigationspecific questionnaires and implementation guides.

2.3.1.4 Case investigation should be supported by reusable questionnaire libraries that
use common terminology (where available) to maximize the efficiency of data
exchange.

2.3.1.5 Systems supporting OM should provide a manual or automatic means of
updating the status of case records as the case definition changes.

2.3.1.6 Systems supporting OM should track the changes made to the status of case
records as a result of changes in the case definition.

2.3.2 **Linking**

_**Linkages allow investigators to create meaningful analysis, characterize the event, and**_
_**identify at-risk populations.**_

2.3.2.1 Systems supporting OM must support dynamically defined associations
between entities for the purpose of defining relationships. For example,
person-to-person (e.g., family relationship, exposure relationship), person-toplace (e.g., household, common place), animal-to-person, object-to-place,
person-to-travel.

2.3.2.2 Entity-to-epi data links must match the entity to their symptoms, survey
questions, specimens/samples collected, laboratory results, and prophylaxis
and treatment data.

2.3.2.3 Each new case must be able to link an assigned Entity ID to an Event ID
within the scope of the investigation.

2.3.2.4 Systems supporting OM require the ability to capture information about
possible cases and potential contacts from the identification process through
the treatment and follow-up process, as supported by linkages among entities,
events, and actions.

2.3.2.5 Laboratory results must be linked to corresponding specimens/samples
including multiple results from one specimen/sample), and subjects when the
participating laboratory returns the results. These linkages must
unambiguously associate multiple laboratory results to case and contact
identifiers.

2.3.2.5.a If the specimen/sample was created from another specimen/sample
(e.g., aliquots, and new specimen types created from a source sample),
laboratory results for the child specimens/samples must be linked to
the corresponding parent specimen/sample.

2.3.3 **Contact Exposure Tracing**

2.3.3.1 Each investigation subject may be associated with exposure contacts,
including unambiguous links to contacts in other jurisdictions.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 12 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.3.3.2 Contacts of exposed entities (e.g., people, animals, places) may be traced,
investigated, and monitored.

2.3.3.3 Systems supporting OM should be able to create new contacts from existing
case records, and should also identify the contact type.

2.3.3.4 Systems supporting OM must support contact exposure tracing by allowing
one contact to be linked to multiple cases, and allowing multiple contacts to
be linked to a single case.

2.3.3.5 Systems supporting OM should be able to produce contact work lists for each
investigator to use, and should allow sorting by priority or geography.


**2.4 ANALYSIS, VISUALIZATION, AND REPORT GENERATION**

2.4.1 Systems supporting OM should allow for analytical searches based upon multiple
criteria.

2.4.2 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to produce charts, maps, and graphs
that illustrate OM data, such as epi-curves and the effect of vaccination or
prophylaxis on the number of new cases (demonstrating the effectiveness in
containing the health event) or maps that illustrate the number of cases by zip code.

2.4.3 Systems supporting OM should generate electronic data dictionaries for dynamic
data (or other user-defined data descriptions to assist with effective data exchange),
line lists, activity logs, aggregate data, and call-back lists to assist the emergency
response group and investigators in responding to and containing a health event.

2.4.4 Reports generated by systems supporting OM should clearly indicate the number of
cases, the number of contacts per case, the number of cases with no known epi-link
at the time of diagnosis, the laboratory results, and the number of vaccinations
and/or treatments administered.

2.4.5 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to produce pre-formatted queries
and reports to allow faster and more accurate reporting, while still allowing the
flexibility of ad-hoc reporting.

2.4.6 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to produce individual reports for
each emergency team member or investigator.

2.4.7 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to compare characteristics of
exposed and non-exposed (i.e., controls) persons.

2.4.8 Systems supporting OM should have the ability to produce lists of action items
(e.g., to do lists).

2.4.9 Systems supporting OM must have the ability to print questionnaires for multiple
uses, including taking to the field, use during phone interviews, etc.

2.4.10 Systems supporting OM must be able to aggregate data. Examples of aggregated
data to be supported are: number of cases, number of contacts per case, and number
of vaccinations and/or treatments administered.

2.4.11 Health event data should be aggregated into a centralized data store (i.e., data
warehouse) designed specifically to support analysis of events over time.


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 13 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.4.12 Data should be accessible for use with commonly available analytical tools (e.g.,
SAS, SPSS, EPI-INFO, MS Access, MS Excel, Crystal Reports).


**2.5 SYSTEM INTEGRATION AND DATA EXCHANGE**

_**Systems integration requirements specific to systems supporting OM are included in the**_
_**section below and describe the types of data that OM should be able to send and receive.**_
_**This section is limited to describing the types of data exchange that OM must support;**_
_**not the requirements for transporting the data. Bi-directional, secure exchange of data**_
_**with partner organizations supports public health investigations across all levels of**_
_**public health. Message construction and parsing, and secure data transport**_
_**requirements that span PHIN functional areas are separately defined and should be**_
_**reviewed in “PHIN Preparedness Cross Functional Components Requirements”,**_
_**[available at www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_ .

2.5.1 Contact information for key response partner organizations should be stored in a
local instance of a public health directory for associating to a health event, as
described in section _2.2.2 Health event Data_ of this document.

2.5.2 Systems supporting OM must be able to accept data from other partner systems
supporting OM.

2.5.3 Systems supporting OM must be able to create and send messages for laboratory
test requests. This requirement is identified as a key performance measure for
assessing preparedness as described in _PHIN Preparedness Key Performance_
_Measures_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.5.4 Systems supporting OM should be able to receive, parse and process messages for
laboratory test request responses, in accordance with _PHIN Laboratory Test Order_
_Response Message Implementation Guide_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.5.5 Systems supporting OM must be able to receive, parse and process messages for
laboratory results. This requirement is identified as a key performance measure for
assessing preparedness as described in _PHIN Preparedness Key Performance_
_Measures_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.5.5.1 Laboratory results should be linked to laboratory test requests, which
are linked to subjects.

2.5.6 Systems supporting OM should be able to exchange messages for laboratory results
with systems supporting surveillance, early event detection (EED), and other
preparedness areas.

2.5.7 Systems supporting OM must be able to exchange messages for confirmed,
probable and suspect cases, and the other case classifications that are noted in the
PHIN message implementation guide, with systems supporting surveillance, early
event detection (EED), and other preparedness areas. This requirement is identified
as a key performance measure for assessing preparedness as described in _PHIN_
_Preparedness Key Performance Measures_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 14 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


2.5.8 Systems supporting OM must exchange messages for investigations and for
exposure contacts. This requirement is identified as a key performance measure for
assessing preparedness as described in _PHIN Preparedness Key Performance_
_Measures_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.5.9 [Systems supporting OM must be able to receive, parse and process messages for](http:///)
[countermeasures that have been administered. This requirement is identified as a](http:///)
[key performance measure for assessing preparedness as described in](http:///) _PHIN_
_[Preparedness Key Performance Measures](http:///)_, available at _www.cdc.gov/phin_ [.](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)

2.5.9.1 Countermeasures that have been administered must be linked to the
entity that was administered the countermeasures.

2.5.10 Systems supporting OM must be able to create and send messages for
countermeasure administration requests. This requirement is identified as a key
performance measure for assessing preparedness as described in _PHIN_
_Preparedness Key Performance Measures_, available at _[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)_ .

2.5.11 Systems supporting OM must be able to exchange aggregated data. Examples of
aggregated data to be supported are: number of cases, number of contacts per case,
and number of vaccinations and/or treatments administered.

2.5.12 Systems supporting OM should be able to provide the aggregate data necessary for
health event monitoring to systems that support response tracking, such as the
number of suspect cases, number of persons under isolation or quarantine, and the
number of patients receiving countermeasures.

2.5.13 Mapping interfaces and data dictionaries must be clearly defined and included in
data exchanges to indicate and describe both standard and customized fields
because systems supporting OM are configurable to meet the individual needs of
each event and therefore collect data specific to each event.

2.5.14 Message components should be grouped by observation type (e.g., laboratory,
symptom, exposure, risk, treatment) by systems supporting OM.

2.5.15 Systems supporting OM should support multiple file formats for import and export,
such as databases, spreadsheets, messages, and text files, among others.

2.5.16 Data exchange should support analysis and information sharing of possible health
events at all levels of public health (e.g., national, state, local).


**2.6 VOCABULARY STANDARDS**

_**It is recommended that standards be used across systems supporting OM; however, it is**_
_**required that vocabulary standards be used when exchanging data. Vocabulary**_
_**requirements that span PHIN functional areas should be reviewed in “PHIN**_
_**Preparedness**_ _**Cross**_ _**Functional**_ _**Components**_ _**Requirements”,**_ _**available**_ _**at**_
_**[www.cdc.gov/phin](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_ .


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 15 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


_**Outbreak Management Functional Requirements**_ _**Version:**_ _1.0_


**2.7 OPERATIONS**

_**Operational requirements, such as system backup policies and procedures, continuity of**_
_**operations, system monitoring, and employee training ensure that public health partners**_
_**can effectively support activities in OM and other PHIN functional areas. Operational**_
_**requirements specific to OM are defined below. Operational requirements that span**_
_**PHIN functional areas are separately defined and should be reviewed in “PHIN**_
_**Preparedness**_ _**Cross**_ _**Functional**_ _**Components**_ _**Requirements”,**_ _**available**_ _**at**_
_**[www.cdc.gov/phin.](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_

2.7.1 Policies and procedures for communicating information to appropriate stakeholders
(e.g., state and federal emergency management organizations, FEMA, hazmat
teams, public works facilities, intelligence organizations, the media, and the public)
should be clearly defined.

2.7.2 Polices regarding data synchronization should be defined to support multiple
deployment options as discussed in section _2.1 System Architecture_ of this
document.

2.7.3 Configuration management protocols and personnel should be identified to support
multiple deployment options.

2.7.3.1 Protocols and personnel should be identified to support the set-up and
configuration of laptops and other field devices used in OM
investigations.

2.7.3.2 Processes and personnel should be identified to support agent-specific
deployment packages, including syndromic grouping libraries and
vocabulary sub-sets, which will be used to efficiently collect data
specific to the particular health event being investigated.

2.7.4 Policies and procedures should be in place for determining when follow up and
isolation and quarantine monitoring should be done as a part of a focused
countermeasure administration and response effort, rather than as a function of
contact exposure tracing.


**2.8 SYSTEM SECURITY AND AVAILABILITY**

_**Systems and data supporting OM must be protected from sabotage, corruption and**_
_**unauthorized access, and must be available subsequent to a catastrophic event. Security**_
_**and Availability requirements that span PHIN functional areas should be reviewed in**_
_**“PHIN Preparedness Cross Functional Components Requirements”, available at**_
_**[www.cdc.gov/phin.](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_


**2.9 PRIVACY**

_**Privacy requirements ensure that sensitive information is not accessibly to unauthorized**_
_**uses. Privacy requirements are broadly defined because they span all PHIN functional**_
_**areas. These requirements should be reviewed in “PHIN Preparedness Cross Functional**_
_**[Components Requirements”, available at www.cdc.gov/phin.](http://www.cdc.gov/phin/)**_


_**Revision Date: 4/28/2005**_ _**Page 16 of 16**_
_**OM_RSv1.0 FINAL.doc**_


