---
consensus_grade_level: 12.8
headings_per_sentence: 0.03
lists_per_sentence: 0.04
smao_sentences_pct: 2.1
vague_words_per_sentence: 0.11
anaphora_per_sentence: 0.15
sentence_cv: 2.893
cpre_terms_per_sentence: 0.54
---
## **VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**
# **SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS** **SPECIFICATION**

## December 2007 **Prepared By:**

### Mixon/Hill of Michigan, Inc. 12980 Metcalf Avenue, Suite 470 Overland Park, Kansas 66213 (913) 239-8400 Phone (913) 239-8070 Fax

All documentation, software, and data related to this project are proprietary and
copyrighted. Use is governed by the contract requirements as defined in the Michigan
Department of Transportation contract 2007-0371. Unauthorized use of this documentation
is a violation of law except as provided for in said contract.


Copyright © 2007 Mixon/Hill of Michigan, Inc. All rights reserved.


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **Table of Contents**


**1** **INTRODUCTION..................................................................................................... 1**


**1.1** **Document Identification..................................................................................................................... 1**


**1.2** **Document Purpose.............................................................................................................................. 1**


**1.3** **System Scope ....................................................................................................................................... 1**


**1.4** **Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations....................................................................................... 1**


**1.5** **References............................................................................................................................................ 2**


**1.6** **Overview.............................................................................................................................................. 2**


**2** **GENERAL DESCRIPTION.................................................................................... 3**


**2.1** **Product Perspective ............................................................................................................................ 3**


**2.2** **Product Functions............................................................................................................................... 4**
2.2.1 Input Services.............................................................................................................................. 4
2.2.2 Dynamic Data Services ............................................................................................................... 5
2.2.3 Persistent Data Services .............................................................................................................. 5
2.2.4 Computational Services............................................................................................................... 5
2.2.5 Output Services ........................................................................................................................... 6
2.2.6 Presentation Services................................................................................................................... 6
2.2.7 Administrative Services............................................................................................................... 6


**2.3** **User Characteristics............................................................................................................................ 7**
2.3.1 MDOT Organizational Structure................................................................................................. 7
2.3.2 Stakeholders ................................................................................................................................ 7


**2.4** **General Constraints............................................................................................................................ 9**


**2.5** **Assumptions and Dependencies....................................................................................................... 10**


**3** **SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.............................................................................. 11**


**3.1** **IS – Input Services ............................................................................................................................ 14**


**3.2** **AS – Administrative Services........................................................................................................... 19**


**3.3** **DD – Dynamic Data Services ........................................................................................................... 20**


**3.4** **CS – Computational Services........................................................................................................... 21**


**3.5** **PD – Persistent Data Services .......................................................................................................... 23**


**3.6** **OS – Output Services........................................................................................................................ 24**


**3.7** **PS – Presentation Services ............................................................................................................... 27**


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


**3.8** **DC – Design Constraints .................................................................................................................. 30**


**3.9** **QC – Quality Characteristics........................................................................................................... 31**


**3.10** **XR – External Requirements ...................................................................................................... 32**


**APPENDIX A -** **DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS, AND ABBREVIATIONS........... 33**


**APPENDIX B -** **REFERENCED DOCUMENTS...................................................... 35**


**APPENDIX C -** **SAE J2735 PROBE DATA ELEMENTS....................................... 38**


**APPENDIX D -** **WEATHER DATA ELEMENTS FROM CLARUS..................... 41**


**APPENDIX E -** **SAE J2354 WEATHER INFORMATION ELEMENTS.............. 47**


**APPENDIX F -** **SAE J2354 EVENTINFORMATION ELEMENTS...................... 50**


**APPENDIX G -** **SAE J2354 LINKTRAFFICINFORMATION ELEMENTS....... 51**

## **Table of Figures**


FIGURE 1 – DUAP SYSTEM SERVICES ................................................................................................... 4

## **Table of Tables**


TABLE 1 – EXPLANATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS TABLES........................................................ 13
TABLE 2 – REQUIREMENT ID FORMAT............................................................................................... 13
TABLE 3 – INPUT SERVICES................................................................................................................... 14
TABLE 4 – ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES ............................................................................................ 19
TABLE 5 – DYNAMIC DATA SERVICES ............................................................................................... 20
TABLE 6 – COMPUTATIONAL SERVICES ............................................................................................ 21
TABLE 7 – PERSISTENT DATA SERVICES ........................................................................................... 23
TABLE 8 – OUTPUT SERVICES............................................................................................................... 24
TABLE 9 – PRESENTATION SERVICES................................................................................................. 27
TABLE 10 – DESIGN CONSTRAINTS ..................................................................................................... 30
TABLE 11 – QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS ......................................................................................... 31
TABLE 12 – EXTERNAL REQUIREMENTS............................................................................................ 32


**Revision History**

|Revision|Issue Date|Status|Authority|Comments|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|01.01|09/12/2007|Draft||Draft for comment.|
|01.02|12/5/2007|Final||Incorporates comments on draft.|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


**Electronic File**

Saved As: **06022-rq301srs0102_DUAP_SysReq_Final.doc**


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **1 INTRODUCTION**

This document applies to the Michigan Department of Transportation’s
(MDOT’s) Vehicle Infrastructure Integration (VII) Data Use Analysis and
Processing (DUAP) System.

### **_1.1 Document Identification_**

The document control number for this document is contained in the document
footer and the file name for the electronic rendition of the document is recorded in
the table of contents for the document.

### **_1.2 Document Purpose_**

The purpose of this requirements specification is to provide a repository for the
requirements governing the design of MDOT’s VII DUAP System. These
requirements will form the basis for the design verification and validation of each
version of the system.

A system requirements specification states what must be accomplished to fulfill
the vision described in a concept of operations (ConOps). It does not state how it
is to be accomplished. This document describes each requirement and the basis
for inclusion of that requirement. The intended audience includes decision
makers, stakeholders, designers, and testers.

This document may be updated periodically to reflect changes in the system
requirements, including changes reflected in subsequent versions of the system.

### **_1.3 System Scope_**

A strategy is laid out in the Michigan Department of Transportation VehicleInfrastructure Integration Strategic and Business Plan that focuses on partnering,
developing, and deploying a VII infrastructure and test beds; increasing safety and
mobility; improving asset management; developing outreach programs to better
expose others to VII in Michigan; justifying the need for VII; and determining
creative investment funding venues for VII activities.

Within this context, the DUAP project will investigate and evaluate the utility of
VII data and its integration with other transportation agency sources in enhancing
safety, increasing mobility, and improving asset management. Tasks within
DUAP will identify uses for the VII data, develop algorithms to use and process
the VII data, develop prototype applications and data management software, and
evaluate the utility of the processed data for MDOT and its partners. Data
processing will require acquisition from a variety of sources, standardization and
integration, storage, synthesis for particular applications, and dissemination.

### **_1.4 Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations_**

This document may contain terms, acronyms and abbreviations that are unfamiliar
to the reader. A dictionary of these terms, acronyms and abbreviations can be
found in Appendix A.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_1.5 References_**

Full citations for the documents referenced in this System Requirements
document can be found in Appendix B, which also includes documents that have
not explicitly been referenced, but contain additional information relevant to the
project.

### **_1.6 Overview_**

The organization and content of this document is based on the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE) standards for System
Requirements Specifications. The requirements presented in this document are
intended to be a complete list of the relevant desires for MDOT’s VII DUAP
System.

Each requirement is identified by a unique number to allow the requirement to be
referenced in future documents, providing traceability throughout the
development process.

The remaining sections of the document contain the requirements for the system.
The sections and their content are as follows:

**Section 2 – General Description** provides a general overview of the
entire system and its anticipated user base. This section describes the
general factors that affect the system and its requirements.

**Section 3 – Specific Requirements** contains the detailed requirements
developed from reference documentation and stakeholder meetings. This
section organizes the requirements into categories that facilitate the design
and testing process. These categories are: Functional Requirements,
External Interface Requirements, Performance Requirements, Design
Constraints, Quality Characteristics, and Other Requirements.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **2 GENERAL DESCRIPTION**

This section provides a general overview of the system and describes the general
factors that affect the system and its requirements. This section does not state
specific requirements, but instead is intended to make the requirements easier to
understand by giving them context.

### **_2.1 Product Perspective_**

DUAP is a research program to determine how new VII data impacts safety,
traffic operations and management, asset management, winter operations, and
transportation planning. The program is focused on demonstration and assessment
of data transformation and management, and DUAP system development is a
means to that end. From a systems engineering functional viewpoint, the DUAP
system has four high-level capabilities:

     - Collecting data

     - Consolidating the collected information

     - Converting data into information needed by transportation agencies

     - Communicating the unified information to various agencies and the public

The DUAP system itself will be a prototype—completely functional for the
desired demonstrations, but not necessarily intended for operational use.

When describing a system, there are many ways to represent what the system will
do and how it will be implemented. Each representation has its own strengths and
limitations, but all are intended to create understanding of the system’s
boundaries, components, and interactions. Each representation has its own set of
basic units and interactions. One or more of these representations taken together
describe the system architecture.

Systems similar to the DUAP system are frequently and effectively represented as
sets of interacting services. Each service has one or more interfaces by which the
services interact. This representation is a very natural way of approaching a
potentially complex system with a basic repeatable model.

A representation based on services and interfaces inherently leads to a flexible,
scalable, and maintainable design. With well-defined interfaces, it is possible to
improve the functions of the system by adding services that conform to the
interfaces, but provide new operations. Services do not unnecessarily constrain
the physical and computational hardware to which they might be deployed. It is
possible to scale the system by adding hardware to support the processing needs
of new services as they are developed and deployed. Maintainability can be
preserved by being able to update both hardware and software components while
the system is running.

A DUAP system based on a service-oriented architecture will then be flexible,
scalable, and maintainable. It will be capable of handling large amounts of
continuously streaming data. It will support current and future MDOT missions
and goals.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


Figure 1 is a simple (but abstract) representation of the DUAP system as a set of
services. As shown in the figure, the basic services provided by DUAP are input,
dynamic data, computational, persistent data, output, presentation, and
administrative. These basic services are common to all information systems, but
will have specific implementations for DUAP to assure that it meets the needs
described earlier in the ConOps.


**Figure 1 – DUAP System Services**

### **_2.2 Product Functions_**


**2.2.1** **Input Services**

The input services of the DUAP system will

     - receive probe data from individual vehicles;

     - receive traffic information from Advanced Traffic Management Systems
(ATMS) throughout the state;

     - receive weather information from several sources; and

     - receive traveler information from Advanced Traveler Information Systems
(ATIS) throughout the state, as well as other governmental and
commercial sources.

The VII Proof of Concept (POC) input service, for example, will use the X-031
Probe Data Service interface as described by the VII Network User to Service
Delivery Node (SDN) Subsystem document. DUAP data input services will send
a subscription request to the Probe Data Service, to be fulfilled within the VII
network. As infrastructure data are collected from the vehicles by the network, the
network feeds the data continuously to the subscribed DUAP services. (U.S.
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. 2006.)


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


Data available to input services will vary among sources. In the case of the VII
POC input service, for example, data expected to be available would include
vehicle location, speed, direction of travel, acceleration, brake status, wheel angle,
steering wheel position, and headlamp status. Weather-related observations that
could be obtained from vehicle sensors might consist of ambient air temperature,
air pressure, sun sensor, and fog light status.

Input services will also receive speed, volume, and occupancy data from ATMS
throughout the state. The Michigan Intelligent Transportation Systems (MITS)
Center ATMS, for example, will have its own input service for collecting speed,
volume, and occupancy, and may also obtain event descriptions and messages
posted on changeable message signs/dynamic message signs (CMS/DMS).


**2.2.2** **Dynamic Data Services**

The dynamic data services are a caching service intended to store DUAP data for
fast access over a relatively short duration. For example, probe vehicle data is
available from the VII SDN only long enough to fulfill the registered subscription
data distribution needs. The DUAP system must be able to cache the data after
input such that it remains available for downstream processing.


**2.2.3** **Persistent Data Services**

Persistent data services provide longer-term storage within DUAP of both data
collected by input services and metadata needed by DUAP services to sustain
their operations. Archive services will store data from the dynamic data services
to support future data analysis and management needs. Metadata services manage
data needed by other DUAP services to

     - create a context for the probe vehicle, traffic, and weather data, and

     - describe the operation and formatting of the input, computational, output,
and presentation services.


**2.2.4** **Computational Services**

The purpose of the DUAP system’s computational services is to apply logical
algorithms to incoming vehicle and traffic observations in order to transform
those observations into data that is directly applicable to transportation
management and operations processes. Computational services will operate on the
dynamic and persistent data to perform analysis functions that derive new and
useful information about what is occurring within the public infrastructure.
Derived information can then be operated upon by still other services for further
analysis.

Many computational services are possible. A list of immediately useful
algorithms includes:

     - Incident Detection and Location

     - Queue Length

     - Travel Time

     - Segment Aggregation


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


     - Weather Condition

     - Road/Bridge Condition

     - Pothole Locator

     - Data Quality Checking


**2.2.5** **Output Services**

Output services subscribe to analyzed data and format it for use by other services
both within the DUAP system and external to it. For example, SAE J2354 XML
formatted data can be produced as data output to be used as data input to other
systems or ATIS that enhance public safety and provide access to the managed
infrastructure.

Data output services also format analyzed data for use by presentation services.
This could be as simple as structuring data for presentation as a report on a DUAP
Web page. It could also build informative messages to be sent to VII-participating
vehicles. This interaction could be achieved using the X-032 interface to the
Advisory Message Distribution Service as described in the VII National System
Specification.


**2.2.6** **Presentation Services**

Presentation Services support human interpretation of DUAP data. Due to the
inherent flexibility in modular service implementation, presentation services—and
the data output services that support those presentation services—can be added to
the system as needed.

For example, a traveler information presentation service might be expected to
provide information on incidents and travel times through a Web page.
Computational services—incident detection travel time calculation, and incident
status monitoring, for example—would generate the data, and an output service
would package the data. A presentation service, however, would create the user
interface. Similarly, presentation services for maintenance support systems could
be deployed to generate pavement segment maintenance priority lists, immediate
maintenance alerts, and estimated segment roadway life expectancy from data
created by other computational services.


**2.2.7** **Administrative Services**

Administrative services will exist within the DUAP system to configure other
services. Essentially, administrative services fulfill the role of “meta-services.”
These services will be used to organize the sequence of execution for any of the
other services, view logging information, and to change the operating modes of
the system.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_2.3 User Characteristics_**


**2.3.1** **MDOT Organizational Structure**

The Director of the Michigan Department of Transportation is appointed by the
Governor. The Executive Bureau also includes a Chief Deputy Director, Chief
Administrative Officer, and Chief Operations Officer.

The Michigan State Transportation Commission is the policy-making body for all
state transportation programs. The Commission consists of a six-member bipartisan board appointed by the governor of Michigan with the advice and consent
of the State Senate. The Office of Commission Audit reports directly to the
Commission and is charged with overall responsibility to supervise and conduct
auditing activities of MDOT.

MDOT operates in a decentralized organization composed of seven geographic
regions, with its headquarters located in the Murray Van Wagoner Transportation
Building in Lansing, Michigan, and has responsibilities for highways, aviation,
and transit.

The Asset Management Council has a goal to expand the practice of asset
management statewide in order to more efficiently invest in Michigan’s roads and
bridges. This is done through coordination and collaboration among the member
agencies which include state, regional and local transportation and planning
organizations.


**2.3.2** **Stakeholders**

This section describes stakeholders who use the data gathered by the VII system.
While each transportation agency has its own organizational structure and
functional responsibilities, similar functions and users are present across all
agencies.

The gathered information must be presented to all users in “real-time”, meaning
that the information is only valuable if it can be provided and acted upon quickly
enough to reduce the impact of the event as it is occurring. The information also
needs to be accurate.

Transportation agency (TA) Operators include local, regional, and state
transportation agencies throughout Michigan, and in adjoining jurisdictions.
These operators have one common objective, which is to minimize the impact of
incidents and events on the normal flow of traffic.

In order to meet this objective, operators perform the following tasks:

     - Review major travel impacting incidents and events

     - Assess potential impact on travelers

     - Determine response actions needed

     - Monitor incident or event for status changes

Transportation agency maintainers include local, regional, and state employees
who maintain the roadways and bridges within their particular jurisdiction. They


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


maintain road conditions on a daily basis as well as respond to incidents to
perform cleanup and make necessary roadway repairs.

Transportation agency asset managers include local, regional, and state employees
who analyze the data and information collected about the assets in their area to
determine each agency’s annual programs and projects. Their goal is a costeffective use of resources within their agency.

System administrators include local, regional, and state employees who are
responsible for the administration of the systems. Their goal is to have all
collected data made available for use by the other stakeholders.

Transportation agency management includes the management personnel of the
various local, regional, and state transportation agencies. The management
personnel supervise the transportation agency staff working with both the raw and
analyzed data.

Transportation agency contractors are contract employees hired by local, regional,
or state transportation agencies to perform a specific job within the agency. These
contractors will work with the agency staff to meet the requirements of their
contract.

Travelers are all the people who use the roadways, whether driving or riding in
private or commercial vehicles. They obtain their trip information from various
sources and use it to prepare for their daily commute or for an extended trip. The
trip information may be used by the traveler for determining possible delays along
desired route(s) or choosing an alternative route or mode of transportation.

Emergency services are staffed with trained personnel who respond to emergency
incidents or major disasters both on and off the roadway system. Their primary
goal is to protect themselves and the public during the response to an incident.
The data from the roadway system will assist them initially in getting to the
incident location. After Emergency Services personnel are on-site, the data can be
used to help evaluate the impact of the incident on the current traffic and help
determine if additional resources are needed.

Researchers and university personnel assist the transportation agencies by
analyzing the collected data based on the requirements of the particular agency for
which they are working. The University of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute (UMTRI) is an example of one such group. It has worked with the
Michigan State Police Office of Highway Safety on crash investigation research.
It is important that the data used by the researchers is accurate and complete.

The Michigan Transportation Research Board (MTRB) is led by MDOT and is a
voluntary advisory body to Michigan’s transportation agencies. MTRB will assist
in the following:

  - Identifying and prioritizing transportation research needs

  - Interacting with other organizations that conduct and support research

  - Advocating the value of research to improve Michigan’s transportation
system


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


     - Promoting an exchange of information, ideas, and knowledge

     - Helping to set the direction for annual research programs

     - Evaluating annual progress

Stakeholders in DUAP-enhanced transportation system operations are almost
entirely the same as those involved in the current state of operations as noted
above.

The intent of adding new data sources is to provide a more complete dataset upon
which the transportation agencies can base operational decisions, but there are not
necessarily any new _users_ of VII data within the agencies. The _providers_ of VII
data are, however, new stakeholders in transportation operations.

The automobile manufacturers—original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) —
become stakeholders in DUAP because VII data becomes available to
transportation agencies only if those OEMs provide equipment and
communication systems on their vehicles for transmitting the data to the VII
network. Many of the OEMs are members of the Vehicle Infrastructure
Integration Consortium (VIIC), which is developing the on-board equipment
(OBE) and assisting the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) in
development of applications for VII infrastructure and data. OEMs are in many
cases also developing independent telematics networks from which transportation
agencies might be able to obtain data similar to that provided through the
USDOT/VIIC efforts.

The VII network (and any similar independent telematics networks) will also
introduce a network operating entity as a stakeholder to DUAP and transportation
system operations. Once the VII field infrastructure is in place, a network
operating entity will be needed to operate, monitor, and maintain the flow of VII
data and the infrastructure enabling it. The operating entity’s responsibilities in
this capacity are similar to those of a transportation agency relative to the
transportation network.

### **_2.4 General Constraints_**

In its prototype DUAP applications, MDOT will be evaluating a broad range of
data uses and analyses. Some of these evaluations will benefit from being able to
link probe vehicle data directly to information about the vehicles on which the
data originates. While this ability is of tremendous value in application research,
operational policies will need to be established to protect the privacy and data
ownership of the data originators. While the USDOT VII program is addressing
policy issues for the VII network itself, MDOT will be faced with many of the
same issues as it seeks to integrate VII data into its operations.

For example, while VII probe data is “anonymized” to the extent that it is not
associated directly with a particular vehicle or driver, there are inherent
limitations to that anonymity. In the simplest such case, the VII-originated record
of a vehicle’s behavior could be uniquely correlated to a particular vehicle if it
were the only such vehicle on a roadway at a particular time and corroborated by
other observations. While this may not be a significant policy issue during system


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


development and testing, or when every vehicle on the road is VII-enabled, it
could become an issue in the transition—when some, but not all vehicles are so
equipped, and are therefore more identifiable.

The question of ownership of commingled data may become an issue for DUAPbased information. MDOT and its partner transportation agencies currently
subscribe to selected traffic, vehicle location, and weather information services
that would be blended into the DUAP data streams. While the bulk of data will be
from the VII network, other sources present opportunities for data expansion and
validation that might be necessary for DUAP to succeed. Limitations on the use or
redistribution of data from these third-party sources could hamper the usefulness
of DUAP, and will need to be considered in agreements for those services.

### **_2.5 Assumptions and Dependencies_**

Data latency is the time delay experienced when data is sent from one point to
another. Latency enters into the data collection process in several ways:

     - The time required for vehicle systems to collect and store vehicle data

     - The delay between the data collection and the data transmission from the
vehicle to the roadside equipment (RSE)

     - The time required for the transmission of data from the RSE to the DUAP
system

     - The time required for the DUAP system to process the data and publish it
to other systems

     - The time between the DUAP processing and the transmission to the end
systems

While the VII data is much more timely and complete than data currently being
processed, participants must recognize that VII data is “near real-time” data. Each
system using DUAP data must be capable of evaluating the data based on the
source and date/time stamps to determine the suitability of each data element for
the intended purpose.

Data quality may also be an issue. Vehicle sensors may be in various states of
calibration and may even function in degraded modes. Each application using the
VII and DUAP data will need to have the capability of assessing the quality of
data and making appropriate use of any available data quality flags.

Finally, the amount of data coming into DUAP from VII is highly dependent on
the amount of data collected by each vehicle, the number of VII equipped
vehicles, the number of RSE locations, and the frequency of encounters between
VII equipped vehicles with RSE equipped locations. While these factors can be
controlled during the evaluation phase of this project, only the number of RSE
locations will be within the control of agencies during the full production roll-out
of the system.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **3 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS**

This section presents the detailed requirements for the Michigan Department of
Transportation’s Vehicle Infrastructure Integration Data Use Analysis and
Processing System and the associated institutional program necessary to achieve
the needs and goals described by the VII DUAP System Concept of Operations.
In this section, the requirements are divided into a number of categories as
follows:

     - Input Services – Input Services provide the ability for DUAP to interact
with any other system that might have data needed by DUAP.

     - Administrative Services – Administrative Services exist within the DUAP
system to configure other services.

     - Dynamic Data Services – Dynamic Data Services are the active memory
of DUAP. Data obtained by the Input Services are stored here for use by
other DUAP components.

     - Computational Services – Computational Services apply logical
algorithms to incoming vehicle and traffic observations in order to
transform those observations into data that are directly applicable to
transportation management and operations processes.

     - Persistent Data Services – Persistent Data Services are the long-term
memory of DUAP.

     - Output Services – Output Services subscribe to data within DUAP
Dynamic and Persistent Data Services and structure and format it for use
by other services within and external to the DUAP system.

     - Presentation Services      - Presentation Services support human
interpretation of DUAP data.

     - Design Constraints – Design Constraints are imposed by existing systems,
standards, regulations, or hardware limitations.

     - Quality Characteristics – Quality Characteristics provide requirements
which address the general quality, usability, extensibility, flexibility, and
maintainability of the system.

     - External Requirements – External Requirements are not part of the DUAP
system, but include institutional requirements necessary to support the
DUAP system. These requirements are not testable and are the
responsibility of MDOT.

Table 1 shows the general layout of the requirements tables, and explains the
purpose or content of each column of the requirements table. The requirements in
this document are a subset of the requirements information that is tracked in the
system “Requirements Matrix”. While this document is intended to record the
requirements that apply to a particular implementation of the product, the
Requirements Matrix tracks all proposed requirements for the product. The


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


Matrix includes requirements that may apply to future versions of the product or
which have been deferred due to cost or complexity.

Table 2 shows an explanation of the requirement identification numbering system.

Tables 3 through 15 present the requirements associated with the system services
described above.


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


**Table 1 – Explanation of the Requirements Tables**












|ID|Requirement|Source|Comment|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|A unique<br>identifier (ID)<br>used to trace<br>requirements<br>from<br>beginning to<br>end in a<br>system<br>development<br>process.|The text of the actual requirement.<br>Requirements formulated with<br>“…shall…” are direct<br>requirements; those using “…shall<br>be able to…” are conditioned on<br>other requirements being fulfilled<br>or on factors outside the control of<br>the requirement’s subject.|Source(s) for the<br>requirement;<br>could be a<br>reference<br>document or a<br>“parent”<br>requirement.|Supporting text that may help<br>explain the requirement, its<br>importance, or the risks associated<br>with implementing the<br>requirement.<br>|**H **– indicates that it is essential to<br>the DUAP system<br>**M** – indicates that it should be<br>implemented<br>**L **– indicates “nice to have”<br>**D **– indicates that the requirement is<br>deferred|



**Table 2 – Requirement ID Format**





|Requirement ID Format|Explanation of Format|
|---|---|
|High-Level Requirement<br>AA-NNN<br>Detailed Requirement<br>AA-NNN-UUU|AA<br>Represents the classification of the requirements within the requirements document. The following<br>classifications have been used in this requirements specification:<br>IS<br>Input Services (Section 3.1)<br>AS<br>Administrative Services (Section 3.2)<br>DD<br>Dynamic Data Services (Section 3.3)<br>CS<br>Computational Services (Section 3.4)<br>PD<br>Persistent Data Services (Section 3.5)<br>OS<br>Output Services (Section 3.6)<br>PS<br>Presentation Services (Section 3.7)<br>DC<br>Design Constraints (Section 3.8)<br>QC<br>Quality Characteristics (Section 3.9)<br>XR<br>External Requirements (Section 3.10)<br> <br>NNN Represents the sequence number. Numbering is not necessarily sequential; gaps in the sequence leave room to<br>add additional related requirements when they are discovered.<br>UUU Provides unique identification.|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.1 IS – Input Services_**

Input Services provide the ability for DUAP to interact with other systems providing data to DUAP.


**Table 3 – Input Services**
















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|IS-010|The DUAP System shall collect probe vehicle data.<br>|ConOps § 3.2.1<br>ConOps § 3.2.3<br>ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 4.3.1<br>ConOps § 4.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.2<br>ConOps § 5.3<br>ConOps § 5.4<br>ConOps § 5.5|The ability to collect probe<br>vehicle data is one of the<br>primary purposes of the<br>DUAP project.|H|
|IS-010-005|The DUAP data elements shall include probe vehicle<br>data fields corresponding to the SAE J2735 format as<br>enumerated in APPENDIX C - SAE J2735 Probe Data<br>Elements.|ConOps § 3.2.1|See List in APPENDIX C -<br>SAE J2735 Probe Data<br>Elements for probe data<br>elements to be included.|H|
|IS-010-010|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from the VII Proof of Concept (POC) Probe<br>Data Service (PDS) using the X-031 interface.|ConOps § 4.3.1|The ability to collect probe<br>vehicle data is one of the<br>primary purposes of the<br>DUAP project.|H|
|IS-010-015|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from the Chrysler Fast Feedback (telematics<br>demonstration) fleet using the Chrysler telematics<br>interface.|ConOps § 4.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|H|
|IS-010-020|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from Southeast Michigan Snow and Ice<br>Management (SEMSIM) using the SEMSIM interface.|ConOps § 5.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|M|
|IS-010-030|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from Suburban Mobility Authority for<br>Regional Transportation (SMART) Transit using the<br>SMART Transit interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.7<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_




















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|IS-010-040|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from The Rapid Transit using the “The<br>Rapid Transit” interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.7<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-010-050|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from Ann Arbor Transit using the Ann<br>Arbor Transit interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.7<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-010-060|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from Detroit Department of Transportation<br>(DDOT) Transit using the DDOT interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.7<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-010-070|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from the MDOT fleet using the MDOT<br>probe vehicle data interface.|ConOps § 3.2.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|M|
|IS-010-080|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from truck fleets using the truck fleets’<br>interfaces.|ConOps § 3.2.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-010-090|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect probe<br>vehicle data from the car rental fleets using the car rental<br>fleets’ interfaces.|ConOps § 3.2.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-030|The DUAP System shall be able to collect weather data.|ConOps § 2.3.2.1<br>ConOps § 3.1.1<br>ConOps § 3.3<br>ConOps § 4.3.1<br>ConOps § 4.4<br>ConOps § 5.2<br>ConOps § 5.4<br>ConOps § 7.1|Inferred to be a high level<br>requirement since winter<br>operations is one of the key<br>aspects of the DUAP project.|H|
|IS-030-022|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect weather<br>data from the Road Commission for Oakland County<br>(RCOC) Road Weather Information Systems (RWIS)<br>using the RCOC RWIS interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.1<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_




























|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-023|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect weather<br>data from the MDOT RWIS using the MDOT RWIS<br>interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6<br>ConOps § 4.1|The MDOT RWIS system is<br>currently being installed and<br>should be able to provide data<br>in 2008.<br>The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-030-024|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect weather<br>data from Michigan Department of Natural Resources<br>(MDNR) weather information systems using the MDNR<br>interface.|MHI|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-030-026|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect weather<br>data from MDOT Aeronautics Automated Weather<br>Observing System (AWOS) using the AWOS interface.|MHI|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-030-030|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect_Clarus_ <br>weather data as enumerated in APPENDIX D -Weather<br>Data Elements from_Clarus_.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6<br>ConOps § 5.2|Inferred to be a high level<br>requirement since winter<br>operations is one of the key<br>aspects of the DUAP project.<br>See list in APPENDIX D -<br>Weather Data Elements from<br>_Clarus_ for weather condition<br>data elements to be included.|H|
|IS-030-040|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to include<br>weather condition fields corresponding to the SAE J2354<br>WeatherInformation structure as enumerated in<br>APPENDIX E -SAE J2354 Weather Information <br>Elements.|ConOps § 3.2.1|See list in APPENDIX E -<br>SAE J2354 Weather<br>Information Elements for<br>weather condition data<br>elements to be included.|M|
|IS-040|The DUAP System shall be able to collect<br>Origin/Destination (O/D) data.|ConOps § 3.2.2<br>ConOps § 5.3<br>ConOps § 5.5<br>ConOps § 7.1|Type of O/D data to be<br>collected needs to be<br>established.|L|
|IS-070|The DUAP System shall collect roadway traffic data.|ConOps § 2.3.2<br>ConOps §4.1|The ability to collect traffic<br>data from multiple sources is<br>one of the primary purposes<br>of the DUAP project.|H|
|IS-070-003|The DUAP data elements shall include roadway event<br>information data fields corresponding to the SAE J2354<br>structure as enumerated in APPENDIX F - SAE J2354<br>EventInformation Elements.|ConOps § 4.3.1|See List in APPENDIX F -<br>SAE J2354 EventInformation<br>Elements for traffic data<br>elements to be included.|H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_














|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|IS-070-005|The DUAP Input Services shall include roadway traffic<br>data fields corresponding to the SAE J2354 structure as<br>enumerated in APPENDIX G - SAE J2354<br>LinkTrafficInformation Elements.|ConOps § 4.3.1|See List in APPENDIX G -<br>SAE J2354<br>LinkTrafficInformation<br>Elements for traffic data<br>elements to be included.|H|
|IS-070-010|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from the MITS Center using the<br>MITS traffic data interface.|ConOps § 4.3.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|H|
|IS-070-020|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from the Western Michigan Traffic<br>Management System (WMTMS) using the WMTMS<br>interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-070-030|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from the RCOC system using the<br>RCOC system interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.1<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|H|
|IS-070-040|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from the Road Commission of<br>Macomb County (RCMC) system using the RCMC<br>system interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.1<br>ConOps § 4.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-070-050|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from NAVTEQ Corporation’s<br>Traffic.com using the Traffic.com interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.8|Data sharing agreements may<br>prevent commingling of data<br>with other MDOT data<br>sources.<br>The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-070-060|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect<br>roadway traffic data from the Traffic Monitoring System<br>for Highways (TMS/H) using the TMS/H interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|L|
|IS-070-070|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect traffic<br>data from the Ann Arbor Traffic Management Center<br>(TMC) system using the Ann Arbor TMC interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-070-080|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect traffic<br>data from the Detroit TMC system using the Detroit<br>TMC interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-070-090|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect traffic<br>data from the Superior and Traverse City North Regions<br>TMC system using the Superior and Traverse City North<br>Regions TMC interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_














|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|IS-070-100|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect traffic<br>data from the Statewide TMC system using the Statewide<br>TMC interface.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|D|
|IS-110|The DUAP System shall be able to collect traveler<br>information.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6<br>ConOps § 4.3.1||L|
|IS-130|The DUAP System shall be able to collect road condition<br>data.|ConOps § 5.4|The ability to collect road<br>condition data is one of the<br>primary purposes of the<br>DUAP project.|H|
|IS-130-010|The DUAP Input Services shall be able to collect road<br>condition data from Traffic Management Systems (TMS)<br>using the TMS interface.|ConOps § 5.4<br>ConOps § 7.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined<br>in the design of the prototype.|H|
|IS-140|The DUAP System shall be able to collect work zone<br>(lane closure) data.|||H|
|IS-905|The DUAP System shall log Input Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||M|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.2 AS – Administrative Services_**

Administrative Services exist within the DUAP system to configure other services and manage interfaces with users and other
systems.


**Table 4 – Administrative Services**








|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|AS-020|The DUAP System shall be able to organize the sequence<br>of execution of computational modules.|ConOps § 4.3.7||H|
|AS-030|The DUAP System shall allow the system administrator<br>to add, modify, and delete Input Services.|MHI||H|
|AS-040|The DUAP System shall allow the system administrator<br>to add, modify, and delete Computational Services.|MHI||H|
|AS-050|The DUAP System shall allow the system administrator<br>to add, modify, and delete Output Services.|MHI||H|
|AS-060|The DUAP System shall allow the system administrator<br>to add, modify, and delete Presentation Services.|MHI||H|
|AS-200|The DUAP System shall restrict access to authorized<br>users.|MDOT||H|
|AS-210|The DUAP System shall keep records of user access.|MDOT||H|
|AS-220|The DUAP System shall allow a system administrator to<br>add, modify and delete user access rights.|MDOT||H|
|AS-905|The DUAP System shall be able to log system operations.|MHI||H|
|AS-906|The DUAP System shall log Administrative Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.3 DD – Dynamic Data Services_**

Dynamic Data Services are the active memory of DUAP. Data obtained by the Input Services are stored here for use by other
DUAP components.


**Table 5 – Dynamic Data Services**






















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|DD-010|The DUAP System shall cache (both raw and derived)<br>probe vehicle data.|MHI|See List in APPENDIX C - SAE<br>J2735 Probe Data Elements for<br>probe data elements to be<br>included.|H|
|DD-070|The DUAP System shall cache (both raw and derived)<br>traffic data.|MHI|See List in APPENDIX G - SAE<br>J2354 LinkTrafficInformation<br>Elements for traffic data<br>elements to be included.|H|
|DD-030|The DUAP System shall cache (both raw and derived)<br>road weather data.|MHI|See List in APPENDIX E - SAE<br>J2354 Weather Information <br>Elements for road weather data<br>elements to be included.|H|
|DD-130|The DUAP System shall cache (both raw and derived)<br>road condition data.|MHI||H|
|DD-100|The DUAP System shall cache data only if the data<br>record associates the data with its source, a geo-<br>referenced location, and a timestamp.|MHI||H|
|DD-050|The DUAP System shall cache data for 1 week.|ConOps § 4.3.2|One week allows sufficient time<br>for both immediate operational<br>needs and archiving processes.|H|
|DD-040|The DUAP System shall allow data to be accessed as<br>soon as it is cached.|ConOps § 4.3.2||H|
|DD-905|The DUAP System shall log Dynamic Data Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.4 CS – Computational Services_**

Computational Services apply logical algorithms to incoming vehicle, traffic, weather, and roadway condition observations in
order to transform those observations into data that are directly applicable to transportation management and operations
processes.

Requirements for specific computational services may be added as they are identified in future system analyses. The research
orientation of the project and prototypical nature of the systems development make it very likely that new computational needs
will be discovered as the project progresses.


**Table 6 – Computational Services**










|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|CS-010|The DUAP System shall derive traffic data from probe<br>vehicle data.|ConOps § 3.2.3<br>ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.2<br>ConOps § 5.3|The ability to collect and process<br>traffic data is one of the primary<br>purposes of the DUAP project.<br>|H|
|CS-010-010|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive speed from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-010-020|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive congestion level based on volume to capacity from<br>probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-010-030|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive traffic counts from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||L|
|CS-010-040|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive traffic distribution (occupancy) from probe vehicle<br>data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||L|
|CS-010-050|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive freeway queue length from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-010-055|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive arterial queue length from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||L|
|CS-010-060|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive travel time from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-010-070|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive turning movements from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||M|
|CS-020|The DUAP System shall be able to infer incidents from<br>probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_
















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|CS-020-010|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to infer<br>incident occurrences from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-020-020|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to infer<br>incident locations from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.3||H|
|CS-020-030|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to infer<br>incident type from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.3||M|
|CS-020-040|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to infer<br>incident severity from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.3||M|
|CS-040|The DUAP System shall be able to derive road surface<br>weather observations from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.2||H|
|CS-070|The DUAP System shall be able to derive travel demand<br>from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.3||L|
|CS-100|The DUAP System shall be able to derive roadway<br>surface conditions from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4||L|
|CS-100-010|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive pavement surface conditions from probe vehicle<br>data.|ConOps § 4.3.4||L|
|CS-100-020|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive bridge surface conditions from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4||L|
|CS-100-030|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive pothole location from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.4||H|
|CS-100-040|The DUAP Computational Services shall be able to<br>derive pothole severity from probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.4||L|
|CS-120|The DUAP System shall be able to identify high risk<br>locations.|ConOps § 4.3.4<br>ConOps § 5.2||M|
|CS-130|The DUAP System shall be able to calculate measures of<br>effectiveness.|ConOps § 3.1.3||H|
|CS-140|The DUAP System shall be able to perform data quality<br>checking.|ConOps § 4.3.4||M|
|CS-905|The DUAP System shall log Computational Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.5 PD – Persistent Data Services_**

Persistent Data Services are the long-term memory of DUAP.


**Table 7 – Persistent Data Services**
















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|PD-020|The DUAP System shall store geo-references for<br>Michigan roadways.|ConOps § 2.3.2.4||H|
|PD-030|The DUAP System shall store DUAP system<br>configuration data.|MHI||H|
|PD-040|The DUAP System shall archive cached data.|ConOps § 4.3.3<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.2<br>ConOps § 5.3<br>ConOps § 5.4||H|
|PD-040-010|The DUAP Persistent Data Services shall be able to<br>archive cached (raw and derived) probe vehicle data.|ConOps § 4.3.3<br>||H|
|PD-040-020|The DUAP Persistent Data Services shall be able to<br>archive cached (raw and derived) traffic data.|ConOps § 4.3.3||H|
|PD-040-030|The DUAP Persistent Data Services shall be able to<br>archive cached (raw and derived) roadway weather data.|ConOps § 4.3.3||H|
|PD-040-040|The DUAP Persistent Data Services shall be able to<br>archive cached (raw and derived) road condition data.|ConOps § 4.3.3||H|
|PD-905|The DUAP System shall log Persistent Data Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.6 OS – Output Services_**

Output Services subscribe to data within DUAP Dynamic and Persistent Data Services and structure and format it for use by
other services within and external to the DUAP system.


**Table 8 – Output Services**












|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|OS-010|The DUAP System shall publish data.|ConOps § 4.3.5<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 5.2||H|
|OS-010-010|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traveler data in SAE J2354 format as enumerated in<br>Appendix E.|ConOps § 4.3.5<br>ConOps § 5.1|See APPENDIX E - for listing<br>of traveler data using the SAE<br>J2354 format.|H|
|OS-010-025|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>roadway traffic information in Traffic Management Data<br>Dictionary (TMDD) format.|ConOps § 5.3<br>MHI||L|
|OS-010-030|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic data to TMS using the TMS interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 5.1|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|M|
|OS-010-020|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish data<br>to SEMSIM using the SEMSIM interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 5.2|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|L|
|OS-010-050|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic data in the VISSIM traffic analysis tool VISSIM<br>interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 2.3.2<br>MHI|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|D|
|OS-010-060|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic data in the Synchro traffic analysis tool Synchro<br>interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 2.3.2<br>MHI|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|D|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


























|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|OS-010-070|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic data in the Paramics traffic analysis tool Paramics<br>interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 2.3.2<br>MHI|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|D|
|OS-010-075|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic data in the SimTraffic traffic analysis tool<br>SimTraffic interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 2.3.2<br>MHI|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|D|
|OS-010-080|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic management data in TMS/H interface format.|ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 5.3|Integrate new capabilities with<br>existing applications. The<br>specific format of the interface is<br>to be determined in the design of<br>the prototype.|M|
|OS-010-090|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>weather data elements as enumerated in APPENDIX D -<br>Weather Data Elements from_Clarus_ output format.|ConOps § 2.3.2.6|See APPENDIX D -Weather<br>Data Elements from_Clarus_ for<br>listing of weather data elements.|H|
|OS-010-100|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish asset<br>condition data using the asset condition data interface<br>format.|ConOps § 3.1<br>ConOps § 3.1.3<br>ConOps § 4.1<br>ConOps § 7.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined in<br>the design of the prototype.|L|
|OS-020|The DUAP System shall publish alerts.|ConOps §4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1|||
|OS-020-010|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>traffic condition alerts using the traffic condition alert<br>interface format.|ConOps § 5.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined in<br>the design of the prototype.|M|
|OS-020-020|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish<br>weather condition alerts using the weather condition alert<br>interface format.|ConOps § 5.2|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined in<br>the design of the prototype.|M|
|OS-020-030|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish asset<br>condition alerts using the asset condition alert interface<br>format.|ConOps § 5.4|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined in<br>the design of the prototype.|L|
|OS-020-040|The DUAP Output Services shall be able to publish alerts<br>using the threshold exceeded alert interface format when<br>thresholds have been exceeded.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1<br>ConOps § 6.1|The specific format of the<br>interface is to be determined in<br>the design of the prototype.|H|
|OS-030|The DUAP System shall publish information for the<br>MDOT_MI Drive_ presentation.||||



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_






|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|OS-905|The DUAP System shall log Output Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.7 PS – Presentation Services_**

Presentation Services support human interpretation of DUAP data.


**Table 9 – Presentation Services**


















|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|PS-010|The DUAP Presentation Services shall present data<br>published by Output Services.|ConOps § 4.3.5<br>ConOps § 4.3.6||H|
|PS-020|The DUAP Presentation Services shall include a user<br>interface for browsing traffic information.|ConOps § 4.3.6||H|
|PS-020-010|The traffic information browser shall allow a user to<br>query traffic-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|
|PS-020-020|The traffic information browser shall allow a user to view<br>traffic-related information using a web browser capable<br>of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-262<br>edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|
|PS-020-030|The information browsers shall provide a means for users<br>to select between Metric and English units of<br>measurement for display.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI|Not currently a stakeholder-<br>requested function.|D|
|PS-020-040|The information browsers shall provide a map display<br>which uses icons to identify the locations with associated<br>data.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||H|
|PS-020-050|The system map display shall provide a means to select<br>which data layers are displayed.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||L|
|PS-020-060|The system map display shall support each type of traffic<br>item to be displayed in its own layer.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||M|
|PS-020-070|The system map display shall support pan and zoom<br>capabilities to allow a user to select the area to be<br>displayed.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||M|
|PS-020-080|The system map display shall support de-cluttering to<br>reduce the number of icons displayed when large areas<br>are displayed.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI<br>||L|
|PS-020-090|The information browsers shall provide tabular<br>information identifying locations with associated data.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||H|
|PS-020-100|The tabular information display shall provide a means to<br>select the data to be displayed.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||L|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_










|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|PS-020-110|The tabular information display shall provide a means to<br>select the area to be displayed.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>MHI||M|
|PS-030|The DUAP Presentation Services shall include a user<br>interface for browsing incident information.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1||H|
|PS-030-010|The incident information browser shall allow a user to<br>query incident-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|
|PS-030-020|The incident information browser shall allow a user to<br>view incident-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|
|PS-040|The DUAP Presentation Services shall include a user<br>interface for browsing traveler information.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1||M|
|PS-040-010|The traveler information browser shall allow a user to<br>query traveler-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|M|
|PS-040-020|The traveler information browser shall allow a user to<br>view traveler-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|M|
|PS-050|The DUAP Presentation Services shall include a user<br>interface for browsing asset condition information.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.4<br>ConOps § 7.1||M|
|PS-050-010|The asset condition information browser shall allow a<br>user to query asset condition-related information using a<br>web browser capable of supporting HTML 4.01,<br>JavaScript (ECMA-262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 7.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|M|
|PS-050-020|The asset condition information browser shall allow a<br>user to view asset condition-related information using a<br>web browser capable of supporting HTML 4.01,<br>JavaScript (ECMA-262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 7.1|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|M|
|PS-080|The DUAP Presentation Services shall include a user<br>interface for browsing weather information.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.2||H|
|PS-080-010|The weather information browser shall allow a user to<br>query weather-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.2|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_












|ID|Function|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|PS-080-020|The weather information browser shall allow a user to<br>view weather-related information using a web browser<br>capable of supporting HTML 4.01, JavaScript (ECMA-<br>262 edition 3), and XML 1.0.|ConOps § 4.3.6<br>ConOps § 5.2|Web browsers such as Microsoft<br>Internet Explorer 6.0 (and later)<br>and Mozilla Firefox 2.0 (and<br>later) support these capabilities.|H|
|PS-200|The DUAP System shall require users to log in for<br>system access.|MDOT|||
|PS-200-010|The DUAP Presentation Services shall require users to<br>uniquely identify themselves.|MHI|Could be implemented, for<br>example, through a username.||
|PS-200-020|The DUAP Presentation Services shall require users to<br>confirm their identity.|MHI|Could be implemented, for<br>example, through a password<br>associated with that username.||
|PS-905|The DUAP System shall log Presentation Services data<br>transactions.|MHI||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.8 DC – Design Constraints_**

This section identifies design constraints imposed by existing systems, standards, regulations, or hardware limitations.


**Table 10 – Design Constraints**


























|ID|Requirement|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|DC-010|The DUAP System shall conform to IT standards<br>established by the Michigan Department of Information<br>Technology (MDIT).|ConOps § 2.5<br>ConOps § 4.6.4<br>|The software for this project will<br>meet MDIT standards provided<br>at the start of this project. Any<br>exceptions will be documented<br>and approved by MDIT before<br>implementation. MDIT will be<br>consulted throughout this project<br>to ensure compliance with these<br>standards.|H|
|DC-010-010|The DUAP System shall use a Java software foundation.|ConOps § 4.6.4||M|
|DC-010-015|The DUAP system shall use Java Database Connectivity<br>(JDBC) components to interact with databases.|||M|
|DC-010-020|The DUAP System shall be able to use Oracle 10G as the<br>relational database.|ConOps § 4.6.4||M|
|DC-010-030|The DUAP System shall handle database data requests<br>through standard Structured Query Language (SQL).<br>Commands.|ConOps § 4.6.4||H|
|DC-040<br>|The DUAP System shall use Michigan Geographic<br>Framework geo-references.|ConOps § 2.3.2.4<br>ConOps § 4.1|Section 2 of the ConOps<br>provides a description of the<br>existing systems and interfaces.<br>This standard is listed as a part<br>of that description.|H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.9 QC – Quality Characteristics_**

Quality Characteristics provide requirements which address the general quality, usability, extensibility, flexibility, and
maintainability of the system.


**Table 11 – Quality Characteristics**








|ID|Requirement|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|QC-020|The DUAP System shall be capable of adding new data<br>sources.|ConOps § 3.2.3|Access could only be provided<br>when new data sources are<br>established and available.|L|
|QC-030|The DUAP System shall be capable of adding new<br>computational algorithms.|ConOps § 3.2.3|Access could only be provided<br>when new algorithms are<br>established and available.|L|
|QC-040|The DUAP System shall be capable of adding new output<br>formats of published data.|ConOps § 3.2.3|Access could only be provided<br>when new communication<br>formats are established and<br>available.|L|
|QC-050|The DUAP System shall be capable of adding new<br>presentations of published data.|ConOps § 3.2.3|Access could only be provided<br>when new user interface needs<br>are established and available.|L|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

### **_3.10 XR – External Requirements_**

External Requirements are not part of the DUAP system, but include institutional requirements necessary to support the DUAP
system. These requirements are not testable and are the responsibility of MDOT.


**Table 12 – External Requirements**






|ID|Requirement|Source|Comments|Importance|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|XR-100|Access to the DUAP system shall be limited to users<br>authorized by MDOT.|ConOps § 4.4||H|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX A - DEFINITIONS, ACRONYMS, AND** **ABBREVIATIONS**

The following table provides the definitions of all terms, acronyms, and
abbreviations required to properly interpret this Concept of Operations.

|Term|Definition|
|---|---|
|ATIS<br>ATMS<br>AWOS<br>CGI<br>_Clarus_<br>CMS<br>ConOps<br>DDOT<br>DMS<br>MDNR<br>DUAP<br>ESS<br>FHWA<br>HTML<br>ID<br>IEEE<br>ITS<br>JDBC<br>MDIT<br>MDOT<br>MGF<br>MHI<br>MITS<br>MTRB<br>NCAR<br>O/D|Advanced Traveler Information System<br>Advanced Traffic Management System<br>Automated Weather Observing System<br>Center for Geographic Information<br>The_Clarus_ (which is Latin for “clear”) System is an<br>integrated surface transportation weather observing,<br>forecasting, and data management system.<br>Changeable Message Sign<br>Concept of Operations<br>Detroit Department of Transportation<br>Dynamic Message Sign<br>Michigan Department of Natural Resources<br>Data Use Analysis and Processing<br>Environmental Sensor Station<br>Federal Highway Administration<br>Hyper Text Markup Language<br>Identifier<br>Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.<br>Intelligent Transportation Systems<br>Java Database Connectivity<br>Michigan Department of Information Technology<br>Michigan Department of Transportation<br>Michigan Geographic Framework<br>Mixon/Hill of Michigan, Inc.<br>Michigan Intelligent Transportation Systems<br>Michigan Transportation Research Board<br>National Center for Atmospheric Research<br>Origin / Destination|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

|Term|Definition|
|---|---|
|OBE<br>OEM<br>PDS<br>POC<br>RCMC<br>RCOC<br>RSE<br>RWIS<br>SAE<br>SDN<br>SEMCOG<br>SEMSIM<br>SMART<br>SQL<br>TA<br>TMC<br>TMDD<br>TMS<br>TMS/H<br>UMTRI<br>USDOT<br>VII<br>VIIC<br>WMTMS<br>XML|On-Board Equipment<br>Original Equipment Manufacturer<br>Probe Data Service<br>Proof of Concept<br>Road Commission of Macomb County<br>Road Commission for Oakland County<br>Roadside Equipment<br>Road Weather Information Systems<br>An organization formerly known as Society of Automotive<br>Engineers, now known as SAE International<br>Service Delivery Node<br>Southeast Michigan Council of Governments<br>Southeast Michigan Snow and Ice Management<br>Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation<br>Structured Query Language<br>Transportation Agency<br>Traffic Management Center<br>Traffic Management Data Dictionary<br>Transportation Management System<br>Traffic Monitoring System for Highways<br>University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute<br>United States Department of Transportation<br>Vehicle Infrastructure Integration<br>Vehicle Infrastructure Integration Consortium<br>Western Michigan Traffic Management System<br>eXtensible Markup Language|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX B - REFERENCED DOCUMENTS**

The following documents contain additional information pertaining to this project
or have been referenced within this document:

Forkenbrock, David M. 2005. _Financing Local Roads: Current Problems_
_and a New Paradigm_, Washington, D.C.: Transportation Research
Board.

Fremont Area Chamber of Commerce. Baby Food Festival!. Fremont
Area Chamber of Commerce. [http://www.babyfoodfest.com/](http://www.babyfoodfest.com/)
(accessed May 4, 2007).

Harichandran, Ronald S. Michigan Transportation Research Board
(MTRB) Introduction. Michigan Transportation Research Board.
[http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MDOT_MTRB_Intro_135645](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MDOT_MTRB_Intro_135645_7.pdf)
[_7.pdf (accessed May 4, 2007).](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/MDOT_MTRB_Intro_135645_7.pdf)

IEEE Guide for Developing System Requirements Specifications. IEEE
Std 1233-1998.

IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements Specifications.
IEEE Std 830-1998.

Mahoney, William P., Kevin R. Petty, and Richard R. Wagoner. Weather
& Road Condition Product Improvements Enabled by Vehicle
Infrastructure Integration (VII). National Council for Atmospheric
Research.
www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/PresWrkShop1/Wx&Road%20Condit
ion_Improvements_VII_Mahoney.ppt (accessed September 5,
2007).

Michigan Department of Information Technology, Center for Geographic
Information (CGI). CGI — Michigan Geographic Framework
Network. Michigan Department of Information Technology.
[http://www.michigan.gov/cgi/0,1607,7-158-12618-31485--,00.html](http://www.michigan.gov/cgi/0,1607,7-158-12618-31485--,00.html)
(accessed May 2, 2007).

Michigan Department of Information Technology. DIT — Policies &
Standards. Michigan Department of Information Technology.
[http://www.michigan.gov/dit/0,1607,7-139-34305---,00.html](http://www.michigan.gov/dit/0,1607,7-139-34305---,00.html)
(accessed May 11, 2007).

Michigan Department of Transportation. 2006. _Vehicle-Infrastructure_
_Integration History and Background._ Lansing: Michigan
Department of Transportation.

Michigan Department of Transportation. MDOT — Asset Management
at MDOT. Michigan Department of Transportation.
[http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-9621_15757-25283--](http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-9621_15757-25283--,00.html)
[,00.html (accessed May 11, 2007).](http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-9621_15757-25283--,00.html)


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


Michigan Department of Transportation. Michigan Department of
Transportation Mission, Vision, and Values. Michigan Department
of Transportation. [http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-](http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-9623-65024--,00.html)
[9623-65024--,00.html](http://www.michigan.gov/mdot/0,1607,7-151-9623-65024--,00.html) (accessed May 3, 2007).

Michigan Department of Transportation. Michigan Department of
Transportation Vehicle-Infrastructure Integration Strategic and
Business Plan Vision of Partnership and National Leadership.
Michigan Department of Transportation.
[http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdot/MDOT-](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdot/MDOT-2007_VII_Strategic_Plan_182837_7.pdf)
[2007_VII_Strategic_Plan_182837_7.pdf](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdot/MDOT-2007_VII_Strategic_Plan_182837_7.pdf) (accessed January 9, 2007).

National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). 2006. _Weather_
_Applications and Products Enabled Through Vehicle Infrastructure_
_Integration (VII), v.3.0_ . Boulder: National Center for Atmospheric
Research.

Oregon Department of Transportation. Office of Innovative Partnerships
and Alternative Funding Road User Fee Pilot Program. Oregon
Department of Transportation.
[http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/OIPP/mileage.shtml](http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/HWY/OIPP/mileage.shtml) (accessed
May 3, 2007).

Road Commission for Oakland County. Welcome to RCOC Online—
Commuter Info. Road Commission for Oakland County.
http://www.rcocweb.org/commuter/fasttrac.asp (accessed May 4,
2007).

_Southeast Michigan Council of Governments Information Services. 2006._
_MDOT Freeway Courtesy Patrol in Southeast Michigan: 2005_
_Evaluation Report_, Southeast Michigan Council of Governments
(SEMCOG).

Southeastern Michigan Snow and Ice Management. SEMSIM:
Technologies, Southeastern Michigan Snow and Ice Management.
[http://www.rcocweb.org/home/semsim.asp?page=tech](http://www.rcocweb.org/home/semsim.asp?page=tech) (accessed
May 3, 2007).

State of Michigan. Project Management Methodology Orientation. State
of Michigan. [http://www.michigan.gov/documents/](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/PMM_For_SOM_Vendors_v4_127338_7.ppt)
[PMM_For_SOM_Vendors_v4_127338_7.ppt](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/PMM_For_SOM_Vendors_v4_127338_7.ppt) (accessed May 3,
2007).

State of Michigan. Systems Engineering Methodology Version 1.0 —
The Systems Engineering Methodology (SEM) of the State Unified
Information Technology Environment (SUITE). State of Michigan.
[http://www.michigan.gov/documents/suite/](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/suite/SEM_Version_1.0_April_2007_191710_7.pdf)
[SEM_Version_1.0_April_2007_191710_7.pdf (accessed May 3,](http://www.michigan.gov/documents/suite/SEM_Version_1.0_April_2007_191710_7.pdf)
2007).


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_


U.S. Department of Transportation National ITS Architecture. SAE
J2735: Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) Message
Set Dictionary. U.S. Department of Transportation.
[http://www.iteris.com/itsarch/html/standard/saej2735.htm](http://www.iteris.com/itsarch/html/standard/saej2735.htm) (accessed
September 5, 2007).

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA). Managing Travel for Planned Special Events. Federal
Highway Administration Final Report, September 2003. Federal
[Highway Administration. http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/program_areas/sp-](http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/program_areas/sp-events-mgmt/handbook/handbook.pdf)
[events-mgmt/handbook/handbook.pdf](http://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/program_areas/sp-events-mgmt/handbook/handbook.pdf) (accessed September 5,
2007).

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
Transportation Asset Management Case Studies: Data Integration:
The Michigan Experience. Federal Highway Administration.
[http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/infrastructure/asstmgmt/dimi.pdf](http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/infrastructure/asstmgmt/dimi.pdf) (accessed
September 5, 2007).

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE INTEGRATION (VII) — VII
Architecture and Functional Requirements, Version 1, April 12,
2005. ITS Joint Program Office, U.S. Department of Transportation.
[http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/docs/VIIArchandFuncRequire](http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/docs/VIIArchandFuncRequirements.pdf)
[ments.pdf](http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/docs/VIIArchandFuncRequirements.pdf) (accessed September 5, 2007).

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
2005. VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE INTEGRATION (VII) VII
Architecture and Functional Requirements, Version 1.1,
[http://www.vehicle-infrastructure.org/documents/](http://www.vehicle-infrastructure.org/documents/VII%20Architecture%20version%201%201%202005_07_20.pdf)
[VII%20Architecture%20version%201%201%202005_07_20.pdf,](http://www.vehicle-infrastructure.org/documents/VII%20Architecture%20version%201%201%202005_07_20.pdf)
ITS Joint Program Office, U.S. Department of Transportation
(accessed September 5, 2007).

U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
2006. _VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE INTEGRATION (VII)_
_Network User to Service Delivery Node Subsystem [X-031, X-032,_
_X-033] Software Interface Requirements Specification_, _Version 1.00-_
_Final_ . _November 2, 2006._ Washington, D.C. U.S. Department of
Transportation.

Wunderlich, Karl, VII Data Characteristics for Traffic Management:
Task Overview and Update. Mitretek Systems.
[http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/PresWrkShop2/VII%20DC%20](http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/PresWrkShop2/VII%20DC%20Overview%20(Wunderlich%20for%20Boulder).ppt)
[Overview%20(Wunderlich%20for%20Boulder).ppt](http://www.rap.ucar.edu/projects/vii/PresWrkShop2/VII%20DC%20Overview%20(Wunderlich%20for%20Boulder).ppt) (accessed
September 5, 2007).


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX C - SAE J2735 PROBE DATA ELEMENTS**

The DUAP system shall be capable of storing the following data elements:







|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-010-500|Probe Segment Number|Identifier of related probe data snapshots|
|IS-010-510|Time|Local time|
|IS-010-520|Date|Local date|
|IS-010-530|Time Confidence|95% confidence level for the currently<br>reported value of time|
|IS-010-540|Latitude|Latitude of the center of the vehicle|
|IS-010-550|Longitude|Longitude of the center of the vehicle|
|IS-010-560|Elevation|Elevation of the center of the vehicle|
|IS-010-570|Positioning Confidence|95% confidence level for the currently<br>reported value of positioning entries|
|IS-010-580|Heading|Current heading of the vehicle|
|IS-010-590|Speed|Current vehicle speed|
|IS-010-600|Speed & Heading<br>Confidence|95% confidence level for the currently<br>reported values of Speed and Heading.|
|IS-010-610|Air Temperature|Ambient air temperature|
|IS-010-620|Wiper Status|Indication of wiper status. Settings could<br>be: not equipped, off, intermittent, low,<br>high, or automatic|
|IS-010-630|Wipers Rate|Number of wiper sweeps per minute|
|IS-010-640|Vehicle Exterior Lights|Status of exterior lights. Settings could be:<br>parking lights, headlights (low and high <br>beam, automatic light control), fog lights,<br>daytime running lights, turn signals<br>(right/left), and hazard signals|
|IS-010-650|Rain Sensor|Rain/snow intensity. The value of the Rain<br>Sensor data element ranges from 0-7, with<br>0 indicating "No Rain/Snow", 1 indicating<br>"Light Mist", and 7 indicating "Heavy<br>Downpour"|
|IS-010-660|Sun Sensor|Level of sunlight. The value of the Sun<br>Sensor data element ranges from 0-7, with<br>0 indicating "Complete Darkness", 1<br>indicating "Minimal Sun Light", and 7<br>indicating "Maximum Sun Light"|
|IS-010-670|Traction Control|Indication of whether one or more of the<br>vehicle's drive wheels was slipping during<br>an acceleration. Values could indicate no<br>traction control system, or whether the<br>system is off, on, or engaged|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_













|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-010-680|Stability Control|Indication of whether the vehicle’s<br>stability control system is activated<br>because of the vehicle being too far off-<br>axis during a turn. Values could indicate<br>no stability control, or whether the system<br>is off or active|
|IS-010-690|Anti-Lock Brakes|Indication of whether the vehicle’s anti-<br>lock brake system is on due to an extreme<br>braking condition or a slippery roadway<br>condition. Values could be not equipped,<br>off, on, or engaged|
|IS-010-700|Wheel that Exceeded<br>Vertical Acceleration<br>threshold|Indication of which wheel exceeded a<br>threshold of percent change in vertical G<br>acceleration per second. Values could be<br>All Off (or not equipped), or which wheel<br>triggered the event|
|IS-010-710|Vertical Acceleration|Vehicle’s vertical G acceleration per<br>second|
|IS-010-720|Brake Applied|Wheel braking status. Values could<br>indicate whether all brakes are off, which<br>wheel brakes are applied, or whether all<br>brakes are applied|
|IS-010-730|Steering Wheel Angle|Angle relative to straight that the steering<br>wheel is turned|
|IS-010-740|Steering Wheel Angle<br>Rate of Change|Rate of change of the steering wheel angle|
|IS-010-750|Longitudinal<br>Acceleration|Acceleration along the X axis or the<br>vehicle's direction of travel in parallel with<br>a front to rear centerline. Negative values<br>indicate braking action|
|IS-010-760|Lateral Acceleration|Acceleration along the Y axis or<br>perpendicular to the vehicle's direction of<br>travel in parallel with a left-to-right<br>centerline. Negative values indicate left<br>turning action and positive values indicate<br>right turning action|
|IS-010-770|Obstacle Distance|Indicates the presence of an obstacle and<br>its measured distance from the vehicle<br>detecting and reporting the obstacle|
|IS-010-780|Obstacle Direction|Indicates the obstacle direction from the<br>vehicle to an obstacle. The data is<br>expressed in degrees as azimuth relative to<br>forward direction of vehicle|
|IS-010-790|Yaw Rate|Amount of rotation about vehicle's<br>longitudinal axis within a certain time<br>period|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_











|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-010-800|100% Brake Boost<br>Applied|Indication of emergency braking. This data<br>element is an on/off value which indicates<br>engagement of the vehicle's brake boost<br>assist function|
|IS-010-810|Barometric (Ambient)<br>Pressure|Barometric pressure: ranging from 580 hPa<br>to 1,090 hPa with a resolution of 2 hPa|
|IS-010-820|Tire Pressure|Provides Tire Pressure for up to 4 Tires<br>each with a range of 1 to 255 PSI|
|IS-010-830|Tire Pressure<br>Monitoring System|Indication of whether the vehicle’s tire<br>pressure monitoring system is activated.<br>Values could indicate no monitoring<br>system, or whether the system is off or<br>active|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX D - WEATHER DATA ELEMENTS FROM** **CLARUS**

The DUAP system shall be capable of storing the following weather data
elements from _Clarus_ :











|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-200|essLatitude|Latitude of the<br>Environmental Sensor<br>Station (ESS)<br>[observation] per WGS-<br>84 datum|10^-6 degrees|
|IS-030-210|essLongitude|East longitude from the<br>Prime Meridian of the<br>ESS [observation]|10^-6 degrees|
|IS-030-220|essVehicleSpeed|Current speed being<br>reported by the vehicle|km/hr|
|IS-030-230|essVehicleBearing|Current bearing of the<br>vehicle|degrees<br>clockwise<br>from true<br>North|
|IS-030-240|essVehicleOdometer|Current odometer reading<br>of the vehicle|meters|
|IS-030-250|essReferenceHeight|Reference elevation of the<br>ESS; height to base of<br>station for permanent ESS<br>height to the ground<br>surface upon which the<br>ESS resides for<br>transportable ESS, or<br>height to surface under<br>vehicle for mobile ESS|meters above<br>mean sea<br>level|
|IS-030-260|essAtmosphericPressure|Force per unit area<br>exerted by the atmosphere|10^-1<br>millibars, or<br>10^-1<br>hectopascals|
|IS-030-270|windSensorAvgSpeed|Two-min. average of the<br>wind speed|10^-1 meters<br>per second|
|IS-030-280|windSensorAvgDirection|Two-min. average of<br>wind direction (CW from<br>North)|degrees<br>clockwise<br>from true<br>North|
|IS-030-290|windSensorSpotSpeed|Instantaneous wind speed|10^-1 meters<br>per second|
|IS-030-300|windSensorSpotDirection|Instantaneous wind<br>direction (CW from<br>North)|degrees<br>clockwise<br>from true<br>North|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_











|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-310|windSensorGustSpeed|Maximum wind gust<br>recorded during preceding<br>10 min.|10^-1 meters<br>per second|
|IS-030-320|windSensorGustDirection|Direction of max. wind<br>gust during preceding 10<br>min.|degrees<br>clockwise<br>from true<br>North|
|IS-030-330|windSensorSituation|Describes the weather and<br>travel situation in terms of<br>wind from staffed stations<br>only. Specific ranges for<br>these values are defined in<br>the Glossary of<br>Meteorology|integer|
|IS-030-340|essAirTemperature|Instantaneous dry-bulb<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-350|essWetBulbTemp|Instantaneous wet-bulb<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-360|essDewpointTemp|Instantaneous dewpoint<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-370|essMaxTemp|Maximum air temperature<br>during preceding 24 hours|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-380|essMinTemp|Minimum air temperature<br>during preceding 24 hours|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-390|essRelativeHumidity|Relative humidity|percent|
|IS-030-400|essAdjacentSnowDepth|Depth of undrifted &<br>unplowed snow off<br>roadways|centimeters|
|IS-030-410|essRoadwaySnowDepth|Depth of unpacked snow<br>on roadway surface|centimeters|
|IS-030-420|essRoadwaySnowpackDepth|Depth of packed snow on<br>roadway surface|centimeters|
|IS-030-430|essPrecipYesNo|Indicates whether or not<br>precip is detected: (1)<br>precip; (2) noPrecip; (3)<br>error|integer|
|IS-030-440|essPrecipRate|Rate of rainfall or water<br>equivalent of snow|10^-1 grams<br>per sq. meter<br>per second|
|IS-030-450|essSnowfallAccumRate|Rate of snowfall<br>accumulation|10^-7 meters<br>per second|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_













|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-460|essPrecipSituation|Description of<br>precipitation type &<br>intensity; see NTCIP<br>1204 for validation rules<br>and text mapping|integer|
|IS-030-470|essIceThickness|Thickness of the ice|millimeters|
|IS-030-480|essPrecipitationStartTime|Time when most recent<br>precipitation event began|seconds since<br>00:00:00 Jan<br>1, 1970 UTC|
|IS-030-490|essPrecipitationEndTime|Time when most recent<br>precipitation event ended|seconds since<br>00:00:00 Jan<br>1, 1970 UTC|
|IS-030-500|essPrecipitationOneHour|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 1 hr|10^-1 kg per<br>sq meter|
|IS-030-510|essPrecipitationThreeHours|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 3 hrs|10^-1 kg per<br>sq meter|
|IS-030-520|essPrecipitationSixHours|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 6 hrs|10^-1 kg per<br>sq meter|
|IS-030-530|essPrecipitationTwelveHours|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 12 hrs|10^-1 kg per<br>sq meter|
|IS-030-540|essPrecipitation24Hours|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 24 hrs|10^-1 kg per<br>sq meter|
|IS-030-550|waterLevelSensorReading|Depth of the water from a<br>user-defined point|centimeters|
|IS-030-560|essTotalSun|Total amount of sunshine<br>during preceding 24 hrs|minutes|
|IS-030-570|essCloudSituation|Description of amount of<br>cloud cover; see NTCIP<br>1204 for validation rules<br>and text mapping|integer|
|IS-030-580|essTotalRadiation|Average total radiation<br>during the radiation<br>period|joules per sq<br>meter|
|IS-030-590|essTotalRadiationPeriod|Length of time<br>essTotalRadiation is<br>averaged [i.e.,<br>accumulated]|seconds|
|IS-030-600|essVisibility|Surface visibility|10^-1 meters|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_





|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-610|essVisibilitySituation|Describes visibility of<br>travel environment; see<br>NTCIP 1204 for<br>validation rules and text<br>mapping|integer|
|IS-030-620|essSurfaceStatus|Describes pavement<br>surface status; see NTCIP<br>1204 for validation rules<br>and text mapping|integer|
|IS-030-630|essSurfaceTemperature|Current pavement surface<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-640|essPavementTemperature|Current pavement temp.<br>2-10 cm below surface,<br>specifically at<br>pavementSensorTemperat<br>ureDepth|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-650|essSurfaceSalinity|Pavement [surface]<br>salinity|parts per one<br>hundred<br>thousand by<br>weight|
|IS-030-660|essSurfaceFreezePoint|Solution freeze point<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-670|essSurfaceBlackIceSignal|Indicates whether or not<br>black ice is detected; see<br>NTCIP 1204 for data<br>validation and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-680|essPavementSensorError|Type of pavement sensor<br>error; see NTCIP 1204 for<br>data validation and<br>mapping|integer|
|IS-030-690|essSurfaceIceOrWaterDepth|Current ice thickness or<br>water depth on roadway<br>surface|10^-1<br>millimeters|
|IS-030-700|essSurfaceConductivityV2|Conductivity of the<br>ice/liquid mixture on the<br>pavement as detected by<br>the sensor|10^-1<br>millimhos/cm|
|IS-030-710|pavementSensorTemperatureDepth|Depth at which the<br>pavement temperature is<br>detected|centimeters|
|IS-030-720|essSubSurfaceTemperature|Current sub-surface<br>temperature|10^-1 degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-730|essSubSurfaceMoisture|Sub-surface moisture<br>expressed as a percentage<br>(e.g., 0 indicates dry, 100<br>indicates saturated)|percent|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_





|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-740|essSubSurfaceSensorError|Type of sensor error; see<br>NTCIP 1204 for data<br>validation and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-750|essMobileFriction|Measured coefficient of<br>friction|percent|
|IS-030-760|essMobileObservationGroundState|Prevailing observed<br>ground state of the<br>surrounding environment<br>as determined by the<br>observer; an indicator of<br>past weather conditions;<br>see NTCIP 1204 for data<br>validation and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-770|essMobileObservationPavement|Prevailing observed<br>conditions on the driving<br>surface as determined by<br>the observer; see NTCIP<br>1204 for data validation<br>and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-780|essPaveTreatProductType|Type of treatment being<br>applied to the road; see<br>NTCIP 1204 for data<br>validation and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-790|essPaveTreatProductForm|Condition of the treatment<br>being applied to the road;<br>see NTCIP 1204 for data<br>validation and mapping|integer|
|IS-030-800|essPercentProductMix|Percentage of the total<br>application mix by weight<br>that is of the type<br>specified in<br>essPaveTreatProductType|percent|
|IS-030-810|essPaveTreatmentAmount|Quantity of the treatment<br>being applied|kg per lane<br>km|
|IS-030-820|essPaveTreatmentWidth|Width of the spread of<br>treatment|meters|
|IS-030-830|essCO|Concentration of carbon<br>monoxide in the air|ppm|
|IS-030-840|essCO2|Concentration of carbon<br>dioxide in the air|ppb|
|IS-030-845|essNO|Concentration of nitrous<br>oxide in the air|ppm|
|IS-030-850|essNO2|Concentration of nitrous<br>dioxide in the air|ppb|
|IS-030-855|essSO2|Concentration of sulfur<br>dioxide in the air|ppb|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_





|ID|Element|Description|Units|
|---|---|---|---|
|IS-030-860|essO3|Concentration of ozone in<br>the air|parts per one<br>hundred<br>billion|
|IS-030-865|icePercent|Percent of ice cover on<br>roadway|percent|
|IS-030-870|precip10min|Total water equivalent<br>precipitation over<br>preceding 10 min|tenths of<br>kilograms per<br>square meter|
|IS-030-875|precipIntensity|Description of<br>precipitation intensity||
|IS-030-880|precipType|Description of<br>precipitation type||
|IS-030-885|essInstantaneousSolarRadiation|The instantaneous<br>ultraviolet, visible, and<br>near-infrared (wavelength<br>of less than 3.0<br>micrometers) radiation<br>hitting the earth's surface<br>in watts per square meter|watts per<br>square meter|


_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX E - SAE J2354 WEATHER INFORMATION** **ELEMENTS**

The DUAP system shall be capable of storing the following data elements for
each weather condition item received from SAE J2354 providers:

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-030-901|id|Unique identifier|
|IS-030-902|reference|Reference identifier|
|IS-030-903|issuingAgency|Name of reporting agency|
|IS-030-904|updateTime|Date/timestamp indicating when the item was<br>updated by the issuing agency|
|IS-030-905|location|Geographic location description|
|IS-030-906|altLocType|Alternate location data|
|IS-030-907|elevationsAbove|Indicate whether the information reported applies<br>to elevations above the given elevation|
|IS-030-908|elevationsBelow|Indicate whether the information reported applies<br>to elevations below the given elevation|
|IS-030-909|isForecast|Indicate whether the date/timestamps are<br>forecasted or absolute|
|IS-030-910|coverageTime|Date/timestamp indicating the coverage time|
|IS-030-911|forecastExpires|Date/timestamp indicating the forecasted<br>expiration time|
|IS-030-912|tempSummary|Temperature summary|
|IS-030-913|tempQualifiers|Temperature qualifier|
|IS-030-914|highTemp|High temperature in tenths of degree Celsius|
|IS-030-915|lowTemp|Low temperature in tenths of degree Celsius|
|IS-030-916|currTemp|Current temperature in tenths of degree Celsius|
|IS-030-917|conditions|Weather conditions|
|IS-030-918|sunriseTime|Sunrise time|
|IS-030-919|sunsetTime|Sunset time|
|IS-030-920|skyConditions|Sky conditions|
|IS-030-921|cloudPercent|Amount of cloud cover|
|IS-030-922|visibilityLevel|Visibility level|
|IS-030-923|visibilityQualifier|Visibility qualifier|
|IS-030-924|visibility|Surface visibility in tenths of a meter|
|IS-030-925|windsType|Type of winds|
|IS-030-926|windDirection|Wind direction|
|IS-030-927|windAngle|Wind angle in degrees|
|IS-030-928|windSpeed|Wind speed in tenths of meters per second|
|IS-030-929|windGustSpeed|Wind gust speed in tenths of meters per second|
|IS-030-930|precipitationProbability|Precipitation probability|
|IS-030-931|precipitation|Precipitation type|
|IS-030-932|humidity|Relative humidity in percent|
|IS-030-933|snowDepth|Current depth of unpacked snow in centimeters|
|IS-030-934|snowPack|Current depth of packed snow in centimeters<br>|
|IS-030-935|snowFall|Snowfall accumulation rate in 10~~-7~~ meters per<br>second|
|IS-030-936|snowOffRoad|Depth of snow in centimeters on representative<br>areas other than the highway pavement|
|IS-030-937|iceThickness|Thickness of ice in millimeters|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-030-938|blackIce|Indication of the amount of black ice on the<br>roadway|
|IS-030-939|freezePoint|Temperature at which the existing solution on the<br>roadway will freeze, in tenths of degrees Celsius|
|IS-030-940|rain24hrs|Total water equivalent precipitation over the 24<br>hours preceding the observation in tenths of<br>kilograms per square meter|
|IS-030-941|rain1Hr|Total water equivalent precipitation over the hour<br>preceding the observation in tenths of kilograms<br>per square meter|
|IS-030-942|rainRate|Rainfall, or water equivalent of snow, rate in tenths<br>of grams per square meter per second|
|IS-030-943|precipSituation|Weather situation in terms of precipitation|
|IS-030-944|precipYesNo|Indication that moisture has been detected by the<br>sensor|
|IS-030-945|waterDepth|Depth of the water in centimeters|
|IS-030-946|surfaceWaterDepth|Current depth of water on the surface of the<br>roadway measured in millimeters|
|IS-030-947|precipStart|Date/timestamp at which the precipitation started|
|IS-030-948|precipEnd|Date/timestamp at which the precipitation ended|
|IS-030-949|smogAlert|Smog alert indicator|
|IS-030-950|airQualityIndex|Air quality index|
|IS-030-951|carbonMonoxide|Concentration of carbon monoxide in the air,<br>measured in parts per million|
|IS-030-952|carbonDioxide|Concentration of carbon dioxide in the air,<br>measured in parts per billion|
|IS-030-953|hydroCarbon|Concentration of hydrocarbon in the air, measured<br>in parts per million|
|IS-030-954|sulfurDioxide|Concentration of sulfur dioxide in the air,<br>measured in parts per billion|
|IS-030-955|nitricOxide|Concentration of nitrous oxide in the air, measured<br>in parts per million|
|IS-030-956|nitrousDioxide|Concentration of nitrogen dioxide in the air,<br>measured in parts per billion|
|IS-030-957|particulate|Concentration of small particulate matter of 10<br>micrograms per cubic meter micrometers or less in<br>diameter in the air, measured in parts per million<br>micrograms per cubic meter|
|IS-030-958|ozone|Concentration of ozone in the air, measured in<br>parts per one hundred billion|
|IS-030-959|uvLevel|Ultraviolet index|
|IS-030-960|airQuality|Air quality|
|IS-030-961|airQualifier|Air quality qualifier|
|IS-030-962|levelOfService|Qualitative measure describing operational<br>conditions within a traffic stream|
|IS-030-963|status|Weather-related road closure status|
|IS-030-964|drivingRestrictions|Weather-related driving restrictions|
|IS-030-965|drivingIndex|Weather-related driving conditions|
|IS-030-966|medianType|Type of median|
|IS-030-967|mobileFriction|Measured coefficient of friction in percent|
|IS-030-968|pavementConditions|Pavement conditions|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-030-969|pavementTemperature|Current pavement temperature 2-10 centimeters<br>below the pavement surface in tenths of degrees<br>Celsius|
|IS-030-970|surfaceTemperature|Current pavement surface temperature in tenths of<br>degrees Celsius|
|IS-030-971|surfaceSalinity|Pavement salinity in parts per one hundred<br>thousand|
|IS-030-972|pavementType|Pavement type|
|IS-030-973|treatmentForm|Condition of the treatment being applied to the<br>road|
|IS-030-974|treatmentType|Type of treatment being applied to the road|
|IS-030-975|treatmentAmount|Quantity of the treatment being applied in<br>kilograms per lane kilometer|
|IS-030-976|treatmentWidth|Width of the spread of treatment in meters|
|IS-030-977|pressure|Force per unit area exerted by the atmosphere in<br>tenths of millibars (a.k.a. tenths of hectopascals)|
|IS-030-978|solarRate|Direct solar radiation integrated over the 24 hours<br>preceding the observation in joules, per square<br>meter|
|IS-030-979|dewPoint|Dewpoint temperature in tenths of degrees Celsius|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX F - SAE J2354 EVENTINFORMATION** **ELEMENTS**

The DUAP system shall be capable of storing and publishing the following data
elements for each traffic event or incident item:

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-070-301|id|Unique identifier|
|IS-070-302|reference|Reference identifier|
|IS-070-303|issuingAgency|Name of reporting agency|
|IS-070-304|updateTime|Date/timestamp indicating when the item was<br>updated by the issuing agency|
|IS-070-305|location|Geographic location description|
|IS-070-306|isForecast|Indicate whether the date/timestamps are forecasted<br>or absolute|
|IS-070-307|coverageTime|Date/timestamp indicating the coverage time|
|IS-070-308|forecastExpires|Date/timestamp indicating the forecasted expiration<br>time|
|IS-070-309|typeEvent|Type of traffic event|
|IS-070-310|severity|Severity|
|IS-070-311|status|Status|
|IS-070-312|cause|Cause|
|IS-070-313|description|Description|
|IS-070-314|advice|Advice|
|IS-070-315|affectedLane|Lanes affected and direction(s) of travel impacted|
|IS-070-316|vehiclesInvolvedCount|Number of vehicles involved|
|IS-070-317|types|Types of vehicles involved|
|IS-070-318|injuries|Number of injuries|
|IS-070-319|startTime|Date/timestamp indicating the start time|
|IS-070-320|clearTime|Date/timestamp indicating the ending time|
|IS-070-321|repeatTimes|Repeating times for traffic events which recur over<br>a period of days|
|IS-070-322|furtherData|URL for further information|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

## **APPENDIX G - SAE J2354 LINKTRAFFICINFORMATION** **ELEMENTS**

The DUAP system shall be capable of storing and publishing the following data
elements for each traffic condition item:

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-070-501|id|Unique identifier|
|IS-070-502|reference|Reference identifier|
|IS-070-503|issuingAgency|Name of reporting agency|
|IS-070-504|updateTime|Date/timestamp indicating when the item was<br>updated by the issuing agency|
|IS-070-505|location|Geographic location description|
|IS-070-506|isForecast|Indicate whether the date/timestamps are forecasted<br>or absolute|
|IS-070-507|coverageTime|Date/timestamp indicating the coverage time|
|IS-070-508|forecastExpires|Date/timestamp indicating the forecasted expiration<br>time|
|IS-070-509|capacity|Link capacity expressed as the maximum capacity<br>in vehicles per hour for each referenced link|
|IS-070-510|delay|Calculated delay in seconds (additional time it will<br>take above that recorded during free flow<br>conditions) for vehicles driving along each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-511|density|Link density expressed as the vehicle concentration<br>per kilometer of the link for each referenced link|
|IS-070-512|lanesMinimumNumber|Minimum number of lanes for each referenced link|
|IS-070-513|lanesNumberOpen|Minimum number of open lanes for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-514|length|Link length for each referenced link from<br>beginning node to ending node in meters|
|IS-070-515|levelOfService|Link level of service for each referenced link|
|IS-070-516|medianType|Link median type for each referenced link|
|IS-070-517|name|Link name for each referenced link|
|IS-070-518|occupancy|Percent occupancy measured for each referenced<br>link|
|IS-070-519|pavementType|Pavement type for each referenced link.|
|IS-070-520|restrictionAxleCount|Maximum axle count per vehicle for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-521|restrictionAxleWeight|Maximum axle weight for each referenced link|
|IS-070-522|restrictionClass|Restriction classification for each referenced link|
|IS-070-523|restrictionHeight|Maximum vehicle height in centimeters for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-524|restrictionLength|Maximum vehicle length in centimeters for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-525|restrictionWeight|Maximum vehicle weight in kilograms for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-526|restrictionWidth|Maximum vehicle width in centimeters for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-527|roadNumber|County, State, or Federal route numbers with any<br>associated alphabetic designators for each<br>referenced link|



_© 2007_


_Michigan Department of Transportation_
_**VII Data Use Analysis and Processing**_
_**System Requirements Specification**_

|ID|Element|Description|
|---|---|---|
|IS-070-528|shoulderWidthLeft|Left shoulder width in centimeters for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-529|shoulderWidthRight|Right shoulder width in centimeters for each<br>referenced link|
|IS-070-530|speed|Average vehicular speed in kilometers per hour for<br>each referenced link|
|IS-070-531|speedLimit|Posted or legal speed limit for automobiles in<br>kilometers per hour for each referenced link|
|IS-070-532|linkStatus|Link status for each referenced link|
|IS-070-533|surfaceConditions|Surface conditions for each referenced link|
|IS-070-534|travelTime|Travel time in seconds for each referenced link|
|IS-070-535|truckSpeedLimit|Posted or legal speed limit for trucks in kilometers<br>per hour for each referenced link|
|IS-070-536|nodeDelay|Travel delays in seconds|
|IS-070-537|nodeLinksNum|Number of roadway links beginning or ending at<br>each link node|
|IS-070-538|nodeName|Name of the roadway intersection as used for<br>identification of a link node|
|IS-070-539|nodeStatus|Status of each roadway intersection|
|IS-070-540|owner|Ownership for each referenced link|
|IS-070-541|jurisdiction|Name of the law enforcement agency with<br>authority over the referenced link|
|IS-070-542|affectedLanes|Lanes affected and direction(s) of travel impacted<br>for each referenced traffic condition reported|



_© 2007_


