---
consensus_grade_level: 12.0
headings_per_sentence: 0.16
lists_per_sentence: 0.01
smao_sentences_pct: 1.8
vague_words_per_sentence: 0.1
anaphora_per_sentence: 0.22
sentence_cv: 1.184
cpre_terms_per_sentence: 0.72
---
# GOG Software Requirements Specification

### prepared by: Y. Isasi, P. Sartoretti, C. Babusiaux, X.Luri, [˜] E. Masana approved by: CU2 CCB reference: GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2 issue: 2 revision: 1 date: 2009-03-31 status: issued


### CU2-DU7

## **Abstract**

This is the GOG Software Requirements Specification Document.



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Software Requirement Specification 2


### CU2-DU7

## **Document History**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



|Issue|Revision|Date|Author|Comment|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|~~2~~<br>|~~1~~<br>|~~2009-03-31~~<br>|~~XL~~<br>|~~Version for CDR (very minor changes)~~<br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~4~~<br>|~~20-MAY-2008~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~Modiﬁcations from SRR RID actions~~<br> <br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~3~~<br>|~~15-MAY-2008~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~Version for DPACE review.~~<br>~~Non-Funcional require-~~<br>ments added<br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~3~~<br>|~~28-OCT-2007~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~Comments from DPACE taken into account~~<br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~3~~<br>|~~28-OCT-2007~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~Comments from DPACE taken into account~~<br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~2~~<br>|~~8-OCT-2007~~<br>|~~XL~~<br>|~~Version for DPACE review~~<br>|
|~~1~~<br>|~~1~~<br>|~~28-SEP-2007~~<br>|~~XL~~<br>|~~Version for internal review~~<br>|
|~~D~~<br>|~~3~~<br>|~~27-SEP-2007~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~First complete version~~<br>|
|~~D~~<br>|~~2~~<br>|~~02-JUL-2007~~<br>|~~YI~~<br>|~~SRS Review Issued~~<br>|
|~~D~~|~~1~~|~~20-OCT-2006~~|~~YI~~|~~Initial Issued Version~~|


Software Requirement Specification 3


### CU2-DU7

## **Contents**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



**1** **Introduction** **6**


1.1 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6


1.2 Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


1.3 Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


1.4 Applicable Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


1.5 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


1.6 Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


**2** **General description and requirements** **11**


2.1 Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12


2.2 Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12


2.2.1 Initialisation module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


2.2.2 Epoch Parameters Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


2.2.3 Combined Parameters Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


2.2.4 Spectrum simulation module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16


2.2.5 Output module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16


2.3 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18


**3** **Initialisation Module** **20**


3.1 Description and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20


3.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20


Software Requirement Specification 4


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



3.3 Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21


**4** **Epoch Parameters module** **22**


4.1 Description and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22


4.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22


4.3 Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22


**5** **Combined Parameters module** **24**


5.1 Description and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


5.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


5.3 Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


**6** **Spectrum Simulation Module** **26**


6.1 Description and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26


6.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26


6.3 Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26


**7** **Output Module** **27**


7.1 Description and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27


7.2 Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27


7.3 Input / Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27


**A Traceability to upper level requirements** **28**


Software Requirement Specification 5


### CU2-DU7

## **1 Introduction**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



This is the Software Requirement Specification for GOG, which describes in detail the objectives of the software simulator and the requirements to be considered on its design and construction.The document is organized in a hierarchical way going from a higer level perspective
to a more detailed view on GOG operational flows.

### **1.1 Objectives**


GOG is a tool to directly get Catalogue, Main Database (MDB) data and final (in the sense of
statistically equivalent to the final mission data) data without the use GASS telemetry, GIBIS
or the main ESAC database The Gaia Object Generator (GOG) is expected to simulate catalog
data, auxiliary data and intermediate main database data (including mission final data) for all
the Gaia instruments. It will use error models to provide rapid simulations of large amount of
data. The realism of the simulations depends on the realism of the available error models. The
schema shown in figure 1 depicts from a high level perspective where GOG will produce its
data on the overall current data flow for Gaia:


GOG is based on the Universe and spacecraft & payload models of the GaiaSimu library
(GAIA-C2-TN-OPM-FC-001) and uses error models to provide rapid simulations of large amount
of data. The realism of the simulations depends on the realism of the available error models.
The implementation of the instrumental error models is planned to be a gradual process that
will be based on the study of the detailed pixel-level simulated data produced by GIBIS. The
simulation of processed data requires models of the calibration errors that will be provided by
the CUs in charge of the calibration algorithms development. In order to simulate data at a precise step of the processing, the addition of the calibration errors is planned to be user-selectable.
The output format of GOG simulated data will be according to the Interface Control Document
for the Gaia Main database (GAIA-C3-SP-ESAC-JH-002 in preparation). Note that some of the
steps and options described here will have to be revised when the actual ICD will be available.
GOG is expected to be in continuous evolution depending on the availability of the error models. To allow satisfying all the needs to access specific data, GOG will be entirely modular and
configurable through an input configuration file. For the source generation, 2 main options will
be available:


1. Generation of the data from the Universe model of the GaiaSimu library: the user
will specify a sky region (e.g. an HTM, square, circle). This sky region can also be
defined as the region scanned by Gaia during a given time interval.


2. Generation of the data for an input object catalog: this catalog is generated by the
user and provides all the necessary information of the objects to simulate (with or
without spectra as input).


Software Requirement Specification 6


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



FIGURE 1: GOG global overview diagram


Software Requirement Specification 7


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Note that the relative positions of the sources with each other will not be used by GOG to add
overlapping effects, GOG only works source by source. Only the density at the source position
could be used to adjust the error models (if they are provided as a function of density). However,
we consider the possibly, for a GOG version close to launch, to work also per sky regions (in
addition of working source by source), and to accurately model the overlapping effects (TBC).


Three main outputs will be available:


_•_ universe model catalog data, according to the universe model ICD.


_•_ main data base data epoch data: this is the data as observed and reduced for each
transit of the source. The user can ask for only one typical epoch data or for all the
transits of the source. Those outputs contain the field angles, epoch radial velocity,
G magnitude, spectra, etc.


_•_ main data base data combined data: this is the output produced by combining all the
available epoch data, e.g. the derived parallax, proper motions, mean radial velocity,
G magnitude, spectra, etc. The combined data can be queried for a given reduction
stage (6 months, 12 months, etc. from the mission start) or for all transits (thereby
providing the end-of-mission data). There is also the possibility, especially used
when the sources are generated from an input object catalog with no information
on the object position implying that the number of transits can not be derived, to
specify the number of transits (for end-of-mission data) instead of the reduction
stage.


For the noise generation, the noise effects will be user-selectable: they can be added or not and
their values may also be given by the user (depending on the noise). Two main types of noises
will be simulated:


1. Instrumental noise: noise that will come from the observation process, e.g. on-board
detection and tracking or observation dead-time.


2. Reduction noise: Noise that will be added to the data when trying to remove the
instrumental noise (see above) and extract the scientific content, e.g. residuals from
cosmic rays removal, background subtraction, subtraction of close sources or second FoV contamination.


This will depend on the availability of the models.


Note that GOG aim will not be to produce raw data but pre-processed data so that GOG will
put more effort on simulating how the instrumental noise will be removed (or not) than on


Software Requirement Specification 8


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



simulating the instrumental noise itself. The user interested on the simulation of the details of
the instrumental noise (including crowding issues) should use GIBIS instead. Note that spectra
can be considered as close to the instrumental noise as the PSF in particular will never be
removed from the raw spectra.

### **1.2 Scope**


The present document is address to all the Cu’s members that require an understanding of the
software requirements,restriccions and assumptions considered to design and build GOG. To
help on this, several SADT diagrams of the main and alternate execution flows are provided.

### **1.3 Assumptions**


The following requirements have been capture thinking on a GOG generic operational behaviour. At this stage some spectations for GOG might changed.The main hurdle GOG has,
is that the contents of the main database are not fully completed. For this reason the initial
versions of Gog will consider the current specifications and will be based on the restrictions
described in section 11.

### **1.4 Applicable Documents**


JH-001 Interface Control Document for the Gaia Main Database
CR-001 Gaia Universe Model Interface Control Document
TL-001 DPAC Product Assurance Plan
XL-005 Software Development Plan for CU2

### **1.5 References**


Hernandez, J., 2008, _Main Database Interface Control Document_,
`GAIA-C1-SP-ESAC-JH-001`,
URL `[http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2786145](http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2786145)`

Levoir, T., Damery, J., Hoar, J., et al., 2007, _DPAC Software Product Assurance Plan_,
`GAIA-C1-PL-CNES-TL-001`,
URL `[http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2439085](http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2439085)`

Luri, X., Babusiaux, C., Wallut, J., 2009, _CU2 Software development plan_,
`GAIA-C2-PL-UB-XL-005`,
URL `[http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2785388](http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2785388)`


Software Requirement Specification 9


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Reyle, C., Robin, A., Arenou, F., et al., 2008, _Universe model ICD_,
`GAIA-C2-SP-LAOB-CR-001`,
URL `[http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2732832](http://www.rssd.esa.int/llink/livelink/open/2732832)`

### **1.6 Definitions, acronyms, and abbreviations**


The requirements set out in this SRS follow the labeling scheme:


**CU2-** _GOG_ **-** _module_ **-** _X_ **-** _SCOPE_ **-** _xxx_


where _GOG_ is the Software Product Label, _module_ identifies the GOG module. _X_ is either `S`
(for **S** cientific), `T` (for **T** echnical), `Q` (for **Q** uality Assurance), or `M` (for **M** anagement). _SCOPE_
is a three or four letter scope specification of the requirement following the identified list of
possible values of TL-001 whenever feasible. _xxx_ is a monotonically increasing counter starting
at 20 for every unique combination of _module_ - _SCOPE_ .


Each requirement is presented with its unique label and a number of attributes in accordance
with TL-001 in the following form:

|GOG-module-X-SCOPE-020|C.v|Verific.|Status|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Description~~<br>|~~Description~~<br>|~~Description~~<br>|~~Description~~<br>|
|~~Parent: Parent~~|~~Parent: Parent~~|~~Parent: Parent~~|~~Parent: Parent~~|



with (see TL-001 for lists of allowed values, meanings and valid ranges):



_GOG_ - _module_ - _X_ - _SCOPE_ - _xxx_
The unique identifier of the requirement (see above)

Version number of the requirement composed of major ( _C_ ) and minor
_C.v_
( _v_ ) part
Priority Priority of the requirement

Envisaged validation method of requirement - this will be either AUT
Verification for automated or MAN for Manual. The Software Test Plan defines
precisely how the requirement is verified.
Status Status identifier
Parent Higher level requirement or requirements, comma separated list


_SCOPE_ is a three character scope specification of the requirement one of :


REQ: concerning requirements,


Software Requirement Specification 10


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



SPC: concerning specification activities,
DES: concerning design activities,
IMP: concerning implementation activities,
INT: concerning integration activities,
VAL: concerning validation activities,
ACP: concerning acceptance activities,
MNT: concerning maintenance activities,
OPS: concerning operation activities,
FUN: concerning functional requirements,
PLN: concerning organisational requirements (including planning, phases, reviews, etc.),
SUP: concerning support requirements,
PRF: concerning performance requirements (including dimensioning, resource estimation, etc.),
RSK: concerning risk management requirements,
CTL: concerning verification and control activities,
CNF: concerning configuration management activities,
DIM: concerning dimensioning activities.


The following is a complete list of acronyms used in this document.


List of acronyms used in this document:

|Acronym|Description|
|---|---|
|~~CU~~<br>|~~Coordination Unit (in DPAC)~~<br>|
|~~DPAC~~<br>|~~Data Processing and Analysis Consortium~~<br>|
|~~DU~~<br>|~~Development Unit (in DPAC)~~<br>|
|~~GASS~~<br>|~~GAia System-level Simulator~~<br>|
|~~GIBIS~~<br>|~~Gaia Instrument and Basic Image Simulator~~<br>|
|~~GOG~~<br>|~~Gaia Object Generator~~<br>|
|~~I/O~~<br>|~~Input/Output~~<br>|
|~~QA~~<br>|~~Quality Assurance~~<br>|
|~~SADT~~<br>|~~Structured Analysis and Design Technique~~<br>|
|~~SRS~~<br>|~~System Requirement Speciﬁcation~~<br>|
|~~UM~~<br>|~~Universe Model~~<br>|
|~~WP~~|~~Work Package~~|


## **2 General description and requirements**


Software Requirement Specification 11


### CU2-DU7 **2.1 Context**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



On this overview we see GOG as a unique software product. From the high level perspective it
can be decomposed on the SADT diagram as follows:


FIGURE 2: GOG general i/o context diagram


Exploding the central box, looking one level deeper, we could distinguish the following main
blocks of execution. The following pictures shows how the problem is depicted.

### **2.2 Decomposition**


According to TL-001 a ’Software Product’ is composed of several ’Modules’. In this section we
describe how the system is logically decomposed and mention the modules which will appear
from Sect. 3 onward and how they interact.


GOG as a software product can be decomposed in software modules. We have identified the
following main conceptual modules


_•_ Initialisation Module

_•_ Epoch parameters Module

_•_ Combined parameters Module

_•_ Spectrum simulation Module

_•_ I/O Module


Software Requirement Specification 12


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



FIGURE 3: GOG data simulation general view


**2.2.1** **Initialisation module**


Figure 4 shows how the initialization module is decomposed


**2.2.2** **Epoch Parameters Module**


If epoch data is requested a transit calculation takes place. The transit (epoch) parameters are
described in figure 5.


The epoch astrometry is decomposed as shown in figure 6.


**2.2.3** **Combined Parameters Module**


If combined data are requested the combined parameters are computed for every requested
mode (see figure: 7).


The combined astrometry parameters computation flow is different from the epoch one as shown
in figure 8


Software Requirement Specification 13


### CU2-DU7

FIGURE 4: GOG initialisation module general view.


FIGURE 5: GOG epoch data computation flow.



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Software Requirement Specification 14


### CU2-DU7

FIGURE 6: GOG astrometric epoch data generation flow.


FIGURE 7: GOG combined data computation flow.



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Software Requirement Specification 15


### CU2-DU7

FIGURE 8: GOG astrometric combined data flow.


**2.2.4** **Spectrum simulation module**


Figure 9 depicts the alternate simulation flow for spectra processing.


**2.2.5** **Output module**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



GOG output module has the responsability to write the final results. Figure 10 shown its decomposition.


Software Requirement Specification 16


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



FIGURE 9: GOG spectra simulation flow.


FIGURE 10: GOG output generation flow.


Software Requirement Specification 17


### CU2-DU7 **2.3 Requirements**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



This is for high level requirements which apply to all modules. These requirements may be
removed from this document and appear in a higher level requirements document for CU2or at
the DPC level. If this section is empty mention the higher documents - they should be in the
applicable document list.

|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-020|1.1|AUTO|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~CU2 will be responsible for the design and developing of GOG that will provide Catalogue,~~<br>Main Database (MDB) and ﬁnal data.(in the sense of statistically equivalent to the ﬁnal<br>mission data) data without the use GASS telemetry, GIBIS or the main ESAC database<br>|~~CU2 will be responsible for the design and developing of GOG that will provide Catalogue,~~<br>Main Database (MDB) and ﬁnal data.(in the sense of statistically equivalent to the ﬁnal<br>mission data) data without the use GASS telemetry, GIBIS or the main ESAC database<br>|~~CU2 will be responsible for the design and developing of GOG that will provide Catalogue,~~<br>Main Database (MDB) and ﬁnal data.(in the sense of statistically equivalent to the ﬁnal<br>mission data) data without the use GASS telemetry, GIBIS or the main ESAC database<br>|~~CU2 will be responsible for the design and developing of GOG that will provide Catalogue,~~<br>Main Database (MDB) and ﬁnal data.(in the sense of statistically equivalent to the ﬁnal<br>mission data) data without the use GASS telemetry, GIBIS or the main ESAC database<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-320~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-320~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-320~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-320~~|


|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG will be fully integrated in the Gaia Simulator project. That is, it will use as other the~~<br>other simulators the Gaia Simu library and the Gaia Tools library.|~~GOG will be fully integrated in the Gaia Simulator project. That is, it will use as other the~~<br>other simulators the Gaia Simu library and the Gaia Tools library.|~~GOG will be fully integrated in the Gaia Simulator project. That is, it will use as other the~~<br>other simulators the Gaia Simu library and the Gaia Tools library.|~~GOG will be fully integrated in the Gaia Simulator project. That is, it will use as other the~~<br>other simulators the Gaia Simu library and the Gaia Tools library.|


|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-060|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~For source generation GOG has 2 main options available: Universe Model from GaiaSimu~~<br>or a Object Input Catalogue|~~For source generation GOG has 2 main options available: Universe Model from GaiaSimu~~<br>or a Object Input Catalogue|~~For source generation GOG has 2 main options available: Universe Model from GaiaSimu~~<br>or a Object Input Catalogue|~~For source generation GOG has 2 main options available: Universe Model from GaiaSimu~~<br>or a Object Input Catalogue|


|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-080|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG has a source by source processing mechanism~~|~~GOG has a source by source processing mechanism~~|~~GOG has a source by source processing mechanism~~|~~GOG has a source by source processing mechanism~~|


|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-100|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG must consider noise effects.~~<br>~~For noise generation those effects should be user-~~<br>selectable (they can be added or not and the values should be given by users).We classify<br>noises in two groups:<br>1. Instrumental noises: noises that come from observation process such as:on<br>board detection and tracking or observation dead-time<br>2. reduction noise: noise added to the data when removing instrumental noise|~~GOG must consider noise effects.~~<br>~~For noise generation those effects should be user-~~<br>selectable (they can be added or not and the values should be given by users).We classify<br>noises in two groups:<br>1. Instrumental noises: noises that come from observation process such as:on<br>board detection and tracking or observation dead-time<br>2. reduction noise: noise added to the data when removing instrumental noise|~~GOG must consider noise effects.~~<br>~~For noise generation those effects should be user-~~<br>selectable (they can be added or not and the values should be given by users).We classify<br>noises in two groups:<br>1. Instrumental noises: noises that come from observation process such as:on<br>board detection and tracking or observation dead-time<br>2. reduction noise: noise added to the data when removing instrumental noise|~~GOG must consider noise effects.~~<br>~~For noise generation those effects should be user-~~<br>selectable (they can be added or not and the values should be given by users).We classify<br>noises in two groups:<br>1. Instrumental noises: noises that come from observation process such as:on<br>board detection and tracking or observation dead-time<br>2. reduction noise: noise added to the data when removing instrumental noise|


|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-120|1.1|MAN|Issue|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG I/O Catalogue format is driven by [AD3] . Main Data base format is deﬁned in [AD1]~~|~~GOG I/O Catalogue format is driven by [AD3] . Main Data base format is deﬁned in [AD1]~~|~~GOG I/O Catalogue format is driven by [AD3] . Main Data base format is deﬁned in [AD1]~~|~~GOG I/O Catalogue format is driven by [AD3] . Main Data base format is deﬁned in [AD1]~~|



Software Requirement Specification 18


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



|GOG-GEN-S-FUN-140|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG must give the same result for identical input conﬁguration parameters~~|~~GOG must give the same result for identical input conﬁguration parameters~~|~~GOG must give the same result for identical input conﬁguration parameters~~|~~GOG must give the same result for identical input conﬁguration parameters~~|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG must provide a way to be run from a command line or a shell script.~~|~~GOG must provide a way to be run from a command line or a shell script.~~|~~GOG must provide a way to be run from a command line or a shell script.~~|~~GOG must provide a way to be run from a command line or a shell script.~~|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG should be able to run in a cluster or grid environtments~~|~~GOG should be able to run in a cluster or grid environtments~~|~~GOG should be able to run in a cluster or grid environtments~~|~~GOG should be able to run in a cluster or grid environtments~~|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-060|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG is built as a standalone java aplication that could be invoked from a command line~~<br>and deployed as a jar ﬁle.|~~GOG is built as a standalone java aplication that could be invoked from a command line~~<br>and deployed as a jar ﬁle.|~~GOG is built as a standalone java aplication that could be invoked from a command line~~<br>and deployed as a jar ﬁle.|~~GOG is built as a standalone java aplication that could be invoked from a command line~~<br>and deployed as a jar ﬁle.|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-080|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG is designed to run on either in a single thread mode on grid environments.~~|~~GOG is designed to run on either in a single thread mode on grid environments.~~|~~GOG is designed to run on either in a single thread mode on grid environments.~~|~~GOG is designed to run on either in a single thread mode on grid environments.~~|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-100|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG runs on LINUX, UNIX and MAC computers (minimum).GOG results are platform~~<br>independent|~~GOG runs on LINUX, UNIX and MAC computers (minimum).GOG results are platform~~<br>independent|~~GOG runs on LINUX, UNIX and MAC computers (minimum).GOG results are platform~~<br>independent|~~GOG runs on LINUX, UNIX and MAC computers (minimum).GOG results are platform~~<br>independent|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-120|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG will have to generate data of a considerable amount of astrosources whose number~~<br>could be a signiﬁcant part of the expected ﬁnal catalogue (20%).|~~GOG will have to generate data of a considerable amount of astrosources whose number~~<br>could be a signiﬁcant part of the expected ﬁnal catalogue (20%).|~~GOG will have to generate data of a considerable amount of astrosources whose number~~<br>could be a signiﬁcant part of the expected ﬁnal catalogue (20%).|~~GOG will have to generate data of a considerable amount of astrosources whose number~~<br>could be a signiﬁcant part of the expected ﬁnal catalogue (20%).|


|GOG-GEN-T-NFUN-140|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG must be able to process one complete source processing on 2 CPU seconds.~~|~~GOG must be able to process one complete source processing on 2 CPU seconds.~~|~~GOG must be able to process one complete source processing on 2 CPU seconds.~~|~~GOG must be able to process one complete source processing on 2 CPU seconds.~~|


Software Requirement Specification 19


### CU2-DU7

## **3 Initialisation Module**

### **3.1 Description and Objectives**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The initialisation modules is in charge of loading and storing the read configuration in a proper
way. T he module has to offer a common interface to get values from the configuration in an
easy manner.

### **3.2 Requirements**


List here all of the requirements on the module including functional and non-functional requirements

|GOG-CON-T-FUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG initialisation Module should be able to read information of the input sources. Options~~<br>are to use the Universe Model or a provided user sources<br>|~~GOG initialisation Module should be able to read information of the input sources. Options~~<br>are to use the Universe Model or a provided user sources<br>|~~GOG initialisation Module should be able to read information of the input sources. Options~~<br>are to use the Universe Model or a provided user sources<br>|~~GOG initialisation Module should be able to read information of the input sources. Options~~<br>are to use the Universe Model or a provided user sources<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|


|GOG-CON-T-FUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the universe model:~~<br>_•_ Galaxy model<br>_•_ SkyBackGroung model<br>_•_ Extinction Law model<br>_•_ DMS model<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the universe model:~~<br>_•_ Galaxy model<br>_•_ SkyBackGroung model<br>_•_ Extinction Law model<br>_•_ DMS model<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the universe model:~~<br>_•_ Galaxy model<br>_•_ SkyBackGroung model<br>_•_ Extinction Law model<br>_•_ DMS model<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the universe model:~~<br>_•_ Galaxy model<br>_•_ SkyBackGroung model<br>_•_ Extinction Law model<br>_•_ DMS model<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|



Software Requirement Specification 20


### CU2-DU7



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



|GOG-CON-T-FUN-060|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG initialisation module must include information on the instrument model:~~<br>_•_ The selected scanning law<br>_•_ Dead time.<br>_•_ Noise models (including detection noise)<br>|~~GOG initialisation module must include information on the instrument model:~~<br>_•_ The selected scanning law<br>_•_ Dead time.<br>_•_ Noise models (including detection noise)<br>|~~GOG initialisation module must include information on the instrument model:~~<br>_•_ The selected scanning law<br>_•_ Dead time.<br>_•_ Noise models (including detection noise)<br>|~~GOG initialisation module must include information on the instrument model:~~<br>_•_ The selected scanning law<br>_•_ Dead time.<br>_•_ Noise models (including detection noise)<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|


|GOG-CON-T-FUN-080|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the reduction model:~~<br>_•_ Instrument effects substraction node bias substraction noises PPE residuals<br>noise<br>_•_ Scientiﬁc content extraction noise substraction of close sources second FoV<br>contamination noise backgound substraction.<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the reduction model:~~<br>_•_ Instrument effects substraction node bias substraction noises PPE residuals<br>noise<br>_•_ Scientiﬁc content extraction noise substraction of close sources second FoV<br>contamination noise backgound substraction.<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the reduction model:~~<br>_•_ Instrument effects substraction node bias substraction noises PPE residuals<br>noise<br>_•_ Scientiﬁc content extraction noise substraction of close sources second FoV<br>contamination noise backgound substraction.<br>|~~The GOG catalogue module must include information on the reduction model:~~<br>_•_ Instrument effects substraction node bias substraction noises PPE residuals<br>noise<br>_•_ Scientiﬁc content extraction noise substraction of close sources second FoV<br>contamination noise backgound substraction.<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|


|GOG-CON-T-FUN-100|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG initialisation module will deﬁne the output speciﬁcation output parameters (spectrum~~<br>RPBP/RVS, astrometry, Vr, physical parameters and ﬂags) epoch and/or combined number<br>of epochs<br>|~~GOG initialisation module will deﬁne the output speciﬁcation output parameters (spectrum~~<br>RPBP/RVS, astrometry, Vr, physical parameters and ﬂags) epoch and/or combined number<br>of epochs<br>|~~GOG initialisation module will deﬁne the output speciﬁcation output parameters (spectrum~~<br>RPBP/RVS, astrometry, Vr, physical parameters and ﬂags) epoch and/or combined number<br>of epochs<br>|~~GOG initialisation module will deﬁne the output speciﬁcation output parameters (spectrum~~<br>RPBP/RVS, astrometry, Vr, physical parameters and ﬂags) epoch and/or combined number<br>of epochs<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380~~|


.

### **3.3 Input / Output**


Input: an XML configuration file


Output: a memory properties-like structure loaded ready to be used


For further descrption on the inputs refer to GOG ICD input parameters section


Software Requirement Specification 21


### CU2-DU7

## **4 Epoch Parameters module**

### **4.1 Description and Objectives**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The epoch parameters module is in charge of all the epoch parameters settings and calculations
of the GOG simulation

### **4.2 Requirements**


List here all of the requirements on the module including functional. This includes nonfunctional requirements

|GOG-EPCH-S-FUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine for epoch data the astrometric parameter (with instrumental and reduction er-~~<br>rors): transit times and ﬁeld angles in each CCD mean transit time and ﬁeld angle for the<br>transit.Gate activation and signal loss due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine for epoch data the astrometric parameter (with instrumental and reduction er-~~<br>rors): transit times and ﬁeld angles in each CCD mean transit time and ﬁeld angle for the<br>transit.Gate activation and signal loss due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine for epoch data the astrometric parameter (with instrumental and reduction er-~~<br>rors): transit times and ﬁeld angles in each CCD mean transit time and ﬁeld angle for the<br>transit.Gate activation and signal loss due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine for epoch data the astrometric parameter (with instrumental and reduction er-~~<br>rors): transit times and ﬁeld angles in each CCD mean transit time and ﬁeld angle for the<br>transit.Gate activation and signal loss due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|


|GOG-EPCH-S-FUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the epoch data photometry (with instrumental and reduction errors): G mag (for~~<br>each CCD and average for the transit), GRP, GBP, GRVS . Gate activation and signal loss<br>due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine the epoch data photometry (with instrumental and reduction errors): G mag (for~~<br>each CCD and average for the transit), GRP, GBP, GRVS . Gate activation and signal loss<br>due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine the epoch data photometry (with instrumental and reduction errors): G mag (for~~<br>each CCD and average for the transit), GRP, GBP, GRVS . Gate activation and signal loss<br>due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|~~Determine the epoch data photometry (with instrumental and reduction errors): G mag (for~~<br>each CCD and average for the transit), GRP, GBP, GRVS . Gate activation and signal loss<br>due to window cutoff must be taken into account.|


|GOG-EPCH-S-FUN-060|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the epoch radial velocity (with instrumental and reduction errors)~~|~~Determine the epoch radial velocity (with instrumental and reduction errors)~~|~~Determine the epoch radial velocity (with instrumental and reduction errors)~~|~~Determine the epoch radial velocity (with instrumental and reduction errors)~~|


|GOG-EPCH-S-FUN-080|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the epoch ﬂags~~|~~Determine the epoch ﬂags~~|~~Determine the epoch ﬂags~~|~~Determine the epoch ﬂags~~|


|GOG-EPCH-S-FUN-100|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the epoch physical parameters (Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the epoch physical parameters (Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the epoch physical parameters (Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the epoch physical parameters (Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|


### **4.3 Input / Output**


The input is the source itself that has a particular transit


Software Requirement Specification 22


### CU2-DU7

The output is the epoch data bean



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Software Requirement Specification 23


### CU2-DU7

## **5 Combined Parameters module**

### **5.1 Description and Objectives**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The combined parameters module is in charge of all the combined parameters settings and
calculations of the GOG simulation

### **5.2 Requirements**

|GOG-CMB-S-FUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|_•_ Compute the astrometric combined data using all previous transits:<br>_•_ Compute parallax and proper motion errors<br>_•_ Determine de covariance matrix<br>_•_ Determine estimated errors for the astrometric parameters at the mean epoch|_•_ Compute the astrometric combined data using all previous transits:<br>_•_ Compute parallax and proper motion errors<br>_•_ Determine de covariance matrix<br>_•_ Determine estimated errors for the astrometric parameters at the mean epoch|_•_ Compute the astrometric combined data using all previous transits:<br>_•_ Compute parallax and proper motion errors<br>_•_ Determine de covariance matrix<br>_•_ Determine estimated errors for the astrometric parameters at the mean epoch|_•_ Compute the astrometric combined data using all previous transits:<br>_•_ Compute parallax and proper motion errors<br>_•_ Determine de covariance matrix<br>_•_ Determine estimated errors for the astrometric parameters at the mean epoch|


|GOG-CMB-S-FUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the combined data photometry: mean G, GRP, GBP, GRVS~~|~~Determine the combined data photometry: mean G, GRP, GBP, GRVS~~|~~Determine the combined data photometry: mean G, GRP, GBP, GRVS~~|~~Determine the combined data photometry: mean G, GRP, GBP, GRVS~~|


|GOG-CMB-S-FUN-060|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the mean radial velocity~~|~~Determine the mean radial velocity~~|~~Determine the mean radial velocity~~|~~Determine the mean radial velocity~~|


|GOG-CMB-S-FUN-080|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the ﬁnal ﬂags (variability, non-single star.)~~|~~Determine the ﬁnal ﬂags (variability, non-single star.)~~|~~Determine the ﬁnal ﬂags (variability, non-single star.)~~|~~Determine the ﬁnal ﬂags (variability, non-single star.)~~|


|GOG-CMB-S-FUN-100|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Determine the mean physical parameters (classiﬁcation, Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the mean physical parameters (classiﬁcation, Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the mean physical parameters (classiﬁcation, Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|~~Determine the mean physical parameters (classiﬁcation, Av, Teff, logg, FeH)~~|


### **5.3 Input / Output**


The input is the source itself


Software Requirement Specification 24


### CU2-DU7

The output is the combined data bean



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



Software Requirement Specification 25


### CU2-DU7

## **6 Spectrum Simulation Module**

### **6.1 Description and Objectives**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The spectrum module is in charge of all the spectrum settings and calculations of the GOG
simulation. This module covers both RP/BP and RVS spectrum simulation.

### **6.2 Requirements**

|GOG-SPCT-S-FUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~Noise consideration on:~~<br>_•_ Flux noise (Poisson noise, total detection noise,...)<br>_•_ CCD combination noise for (RVS)<br>_•_ Wavelength calibration<br>_•_ Multi-transit combination noise (only for combined data)should be added|~~Noise consideration on:~~<br>_•_ Flux noise (Poisson noise, total detection noise,...)<br>_•_ CCD combination noise for (RVS)<br>_•_ Wavelength calibration<br>_•_ Multi-transit combination noise (only for combined data)should be added|~~Noise consideration on:~~<br>_•_ Flux noise (Poisson noise, total detection noise,...)<br>_•_ CCD combination noise for (RVS)<br>_•_ Wavelength calibration<br>_•_ Multi-transit combination noise (only for combined data)should be added|~~Noise consideration on:~~<br>_•_ Flux noise (Poisson noise, total detection noise,...)<br>_•_ CCD combination noise for (RVS)<br>_•_ Wavelength calibration<br>_•_ Multi-transit combination noise (only for combined data)should be added|


### **6.3 Input / Output**


The input is the source itself.The output is the epoch and or combined data bean


Software Requirement Specification 26


### CU2-DU7

## **7 Output Module**

### **7.1 Description and Objectives**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The output module comunicates GOG flow execution with the filesystem. When the flow request a file it obtains it from the system and also it writes the files requested as GOG outputs

### **7.2 Requirements**

|GOG-IO-T-FUN-020|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~The universe catalog output data of the simulation has to follow the universe model ICD~~<br>document.Note: GaiaSimu library will allow to write and read this format.|~~The universe catalog output data of the simulation has to follow the universe model ICD~~<br>document.Note: GaiaSimu library will allow to write and read this format.|~~The universe catalog output data of the simulation has to follow the universe model ICD~~<br>document.Note: GaiaSimu library will allow to write and read this format.|~~The universe catalog output data of the simulation has to follow the universe model ICD~~<br>document.Note: GaiaSimu library will allow to write and read this format.|


|GOG-IO-T-FUN-040|1.1|MAN|Issued|
|---|---|---|---|
|~~GOG output should be driven by the MDB data model.The output will be used to distribute~~<br>extracts to the DPC’s<br>|~~GOG output should be driven by the MDB data model.The output will be used to distribute~~<br>extracts to the DPC’s<br>|~~GOG output should be driven by the MDB data model.The output will be used to distribute~~<br>extracts to the DPC’s<br>|~~GOG output should be driven by the MDB data model.The output will be used to distribute~~<br>extracts to the DPC’s<br>|
|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-340,DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-360~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-340,DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-360~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-340,DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-360~~|~~Parent: DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-340,DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-360~~|


### **7.3 Input / Output**


The output data of the simulation has to follow the universe model ICD document.


Software Requirement Specification 27


### CU2-DU7

## **A Traceability to upper level requirements**



GOG SRS

GAIA-C2-SP-UB-YI-002-2



The traceability between this SRS and CU or DPC SRS or the SIRD is given here.

|Parent Requirement|Requirements in this document|
|---|---|
|~~**DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-320**~~<br>|~~CU2-GOG-GEN-S-FUN-20~~<br>|
|~~**DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-340**~~<br>|~~CU2-GOG-IO-T-FUN-40~~<br>|
|~~**DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-360**~~<br>|~~CU2-GOG-IO-T-FUN-40~~<br><br>|
|~~**DPAC-CU2-S-FUN-380**~~|~~CU2-GOG-CON-T-FUN-20,~~<br>~~CU2-GOG-CON-T-FUN-~~<br>40,<br>CU2-GOG-CON-T-FUN-60,<br>CU2-GOG-CON-T-<br>FUN-80, CU2-GOG-CON-T-FUN-100|



Software Requirement Specification 28


